"Hello everyone and welcome to a press conference here in the Prime Minister's Office, which of course is about what is most important to us all at this time - namely the outbreak of coronavirus, which is increasingly affecting the whole world, and we have seen over the past few days that it is spreading even fast here in Europe.

We currently have 21 confirmed cases of infection in Denmark. And two cases in the Faroe Islands. And that is the assessment, more will come in the near future.

Coronavirus is a serious condition. Especially for elderly people with a chronic illness or others who, for one reason or another, are impaired. And it is also a virus that we must expect can have major consequences for businesses, employees - and put the economy under pressure worldwide.

Many Danish companies have already taken smart precautions, I would like to say thank you, and there is a reason why everyone takes the situation very seriously.

And there is a reason to put a thick line underneath now that we must look after the most vulnerable in our society. We need to look out for each other because it is a prerequisite for us to take good care of the entire community in this situation.

We are following the government's development very closely. And we have very clearly said to all the authorities involved that all relevant tools the authorities consider to be used. And this means that there is full support from the government for the authorities to make the decisions that may prove necessary and correct - both in respect of timely care, but also to always be one step ahead of the infection. .

The strategy chosen by the Danish authorities is basically to delay the spread of the virus as much as possible. Of course, this is a strategy that is primarily about limiting the number of people who become ill in Denmark. But it is also a strategy chosen to mitigate the negative consequences for the surrounding community - that is, all of us. It's about jobs, it's about Danish companies, exports, it's about capacity - the total capacity of our healthcare system, and thus other patient groups, our daily lives, but it's also increasingly about our overall social economy.

Today, I would like to call again for unity and for everyone to do what we can to contain and prevent it.

On Monday evening, the travel guides for the four northern Italian regions were sharpened to orange. That is, the authorities advise against any unnecessary travel. This also means that people who have returned from one of the risk areas since March 2 must be in home quarantine for 14 days.

At the same time, stricter requirements were introduced in relation to the elderly and healthcare staff - they must not meet for work for 14 days if they have been in the special risk areas.

I repeat this also to emphasize that none of us should panic in this situation, but we must act. And we need to act early rather than late, which is why we are presenting a number of new measures and precautions today.

I have just briefed the Folketing's party leaders, and I would like to say thank you for the broad support.

The risk of infection is increased by events where many people are close to one another, and for this reason the authorities will, for the first time, issue new recommendations on the conduct of major events. Specifically, this means that the authorities are urging organizers to postpone or cancel any event with more than 1,000 participants.

At the same time, organizers for events with fewer than 1,000 participants must evaluate the specific event in relation to the risk of infection and in relation to which participants are at the event. We will elaborate on that in a bit.
Anything that concerns events and their organization or non-organization will be the starting point until the end of March. It may be further extended, but it is with the timeline that we are working now.

Secondly, the health authorities are now also issuing recommendations for the way we interact with each other. And this is a message that will apply to all Danes in all the contexts where we have to enter into other people. And it is important that everyone listens and also follows the recommendations that come from the authorities.

Thirdly, we would also like to emphasize today that everyone with planned or contemplated travel activity is constantly updating with the travel guides that come from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, because we must expect them to change their character, and they can do so almost on a daily basis now.

Of course, we are following developments in all the countries around us, and this is not only true of Northern Italy, which has a strong focus on. Yesterday, the travel guides for major neighboring countries - Germany, then France, Spain and Austria - were sharpened so that all travelers were encouraged to pay special attention and stay updated.

Fourth, the authorities have considered that it is necessary to gather all information and information about corona. This means that a new website is now in the air with the name coronasmitte.dk - coronasmitte.dk. And there will be the information material, the questions common questions / answers gathered, so that there will be one place where you can go with all the considerations, which I know, really, really many Danes have of different kinds. Coronasmitte.dk will then become the website to orientate.

In addition, you - you who are here - expect that there will be ongoing briefings, we can get into a situation where it will also be on a daily basis, it can also be called at short notice, so that everyone who is also included communicating this issue should very much keep up to date with information - both from authorities and from the government.

With that said, I would also like to say, I do not think this will be the last press conference, and we can already be in a new situation during the weekend or early next week, where new decisions, new travel guides are made or additional measures. So this is where we stand just for the talk.

These new initiatives are going to affect us all. Not only those who have been traveling, and not only those who are already affected, it will affect our everyday lives and it will affect the social life in Denmark in the coming time.

And that is why I would also like to say to all of you who may be thinking, and just about maybe say, this is an overreaction, and why the authorities in Denmark are not waiting and watching the time. It is not an overreaction, and that is the authorities' very clear assessment, it is that everything needs to be done now that we can do with the contagion we see. And we risk if we expect the infection to develop too much, and then it may be too late to do what is recommended from here.

There will be costs associated with this - for ordinary people, families, obviously companies, organizers. And when we take the steps that are being taken now, it is because what we want to ward off is a potential loss of human life.

So once again just to emphasize the seriousness, and I know that many companies and families alike will be in a situation where you have booked a trip you are looking forward to, a concert you have been looking forward to, other events. And I hope I understand the annoyance, I hope that everyone, even in the specific cases, will rise up and look at this with social glasses. There are citizens in this country who are vulnerable and we will have to do everything we can to take good care of them, and therefore an appeal on my part as Prime Minister for unity, but also for patience. And of course this applies not least to contact with the health care system, which can be challenged along the way in relation to the many, the many tasks that may come into play.

The Minister of Health is not here today. There is a Council meeting in the EU and we have considered it important to be represented at ministerial level. At 14 o'clock there is a technical briefing in the National Police on the actions taken from this. But of course we are happy to answer questions - and before then, I will first speak to the new Chief of Police, Thorkild Fogde