The COVID-19 outbreak is facing a critical turning point. The next few days will be a crucial juncture. The infected people must be identified as swiftly as possible and treated in the early stages. Moreover, the spread of the disease must be prevented. We are at a critical moment that requires the central and local governments as well as quarantine authorities, medical professionals, residents of local communities and the entire population to make an all-out, concerted response.

For this reason, the Government will drastically reinforce the response system by raising the crisis alert to its highest level as recommended by infectious disease specialists.

We are facing a totally different situation after a sizable cluster of COVID-19 infections among members of the Shincheonji Church of Jesus. While the existing quarantine system, centered on the Korea Centers for Disease and Control and Prevention, and the framework of the Central Disaster Management Headquarters will remain intact, the whole response system will be elevated to the Central Disaster and Safety Countermeasures Headquarters presided over by the Prime Minister. The purpose is to step up countermeasures by all ministries and agencies as well as a support system between the central and local governments, thereby going all out in response efforts. We should neither be bound by regulations nor hesitate to take unprecedentedly strong measures.

Daegu and Cheongdo in Gyeongsangbuk-do Province have been designated infectious disease special management zones so that all such necessary resources as hospital beds, personnel, equipment and quarantine supplies that localities cannot acquire on their own can be provided in full. We are also rapidly working out measures to augment and provide support for Daegu’s medical capabilities as they are nearing the point of exhaustion.

I urge the Government to mobilize all available means needed to stabilize the special management zones as early as possible. In particular, not only the resources of the public sector but also cooperation from private medical institutions and professionals should be elicited as much as possible, and proactive support should be rendered to that end.

Despite this grave crisis situation, we can prevail. The Government has sufficient abilities and confidence to rein in the spread of infectious diseases and bring them under control. Most of the newly confirmed cases can be traced to a specific group whose distinct personal connections are verifiable. Therefore, if they are placed within the government quarantine system with thorough management and control, virus transmission outside of the group can be delayed and minimized.

In particular, we are taking extraordinary measures with followers of the Shincheonji Church, a source of mass infection. Above all, we are rapidly screening and diagnosing all of its members to swiftly identify confirmed cases. Most of the tests for those with symptoms will be completed over the weekend, and we expect that the increase in the number of confirmed cases related to Shincheonji will subside considerably once these tests enter the final stage. 

These measures are designed to quickly identify and treat infected patients and prevent the virus from spreading to local communities by thoroughly isolating and safeguarding them from the outside. It is a natural and inevitable measure for Daegu and all other local governments across the country to temporarily shut down facilities related to Shincheonji, completely screen its entire congregation and watch over it in a bid to protect the community’s safety. This is intended not to restrict religious freedom but to safeguard the lives and safety of local residents and the people as a whole. It is also aimed at keeping Shincheonji’s congregation safe. I ask for active cooperation from the Shincheonji Church and its followers.

The same is true for other religions and nonreligious organizations. We have clearly seen how dangerous it is to hold an event in an enclosed, indoor space with a closely packed crowd in terms of the spread of an infectious disease.

I urge people to refrain from holding mass rallies or group activities indoors or outdoors in ways that can harm others and the general public.
 
I am grateful to religious organizations that are already voluntarily taking precautionary measures. 

For its part, the Government will also work together with local governments to take all necessary measures in a strong and swift manner for the sake of public safety and national security.

The Government has drastically strengthened quarantine measures to prevent the spread of COVID-19 to local communities. We’ve designated and are running “safe, risk-free hospitals” for the public that treat those with respiratory diseases and general patients separately. For general patients, we’ve temporarily permitted counseling and prescription issuance via telephone as well as issuing patient prescriptions to their relatives, all at the doctor’s discretion.

The Government is mobilizing all of its resources to prevent the spread of the disease in local communities: strengthening the supervision of convalescence hospitals and nursing homes that are vulnerable to infectious diseases, expanding diagnostic tests for early detection of infected individuals and drastically increasing the number of available hospital rooms and beds to prepare for a rise in the number of confirmed cases. 

We have reached a critical moment in which the roles of local governments are undeniably important. It is time for them to actively demonstrate their quarantine capabilities. The new infections are almost entirely related to Shincheonji, but confirmed cases are being reported in every part of the country. I ask municipal mayors and provincial governors to take the initiative and do all that they can to prevent the spread of COVID-19 in local communities. 

I urge local governments to exercise all of their authority to completely block factors linked to infection. At the same time, I also ask them to preemptively prepare to increase the number of medical facilities and professionals available and to inspect facilities vulnerable to infections, assuming the worst-case scenario.

Most of all, I would like to offer consolation and encouragement to the residents of Daegu and Gyeongsangbuk-do. The nation and people will all stand with them. Seeing the crisis in Daegu and Gyeongsangbuk-do as a national emergency, the Government will pool capabilities across the country to overcome the difficulties. 

The Government will provide all possible support to the designated special management zones. We will do our utmost when carrying out quarantine measures so that people can resume their everyday lives as soon as possible, and we will not neglect to provide support for those suffering social and economic hardships. We will devise not only support measures that can be implemented by the Government but also special assistance measures in cooperation with the National Assembly.  

I also ask the people to actively work together. If they join in the efforts of the central Government, local governments and medical professionals, we can effectively stop infections in local communities. 

I urge the people to cast off excessive anxiety, trust and cooperate with the Government’s measures. When the entire population works together with confidence, we can prevail. Trust and cooperation are the ways to win the battle against the virus. Let us firmly believe in our capabilities and overcome the current hardships while doing our best in our respective positions. Thank you.    
 