Ladies and gentlemen, senators and deputies,
Romania is going through a difficult period of economic and social challenges, which calls for the urgent investment of a Government with full powers in order to pass the country through a severe international crisis, generated by the global coronavirus pandemic.
The Romanian Government has acted firmly and promptly so far from the first signs of the COVID-19 epidemic in the European partner states and has adopted strict measures to limit the spread of Coronavirus infections in our country.
So far, people diagnosed positively with COVID-19 have been identified in quarantine and self-isolation situations at home or in the epidemiological investigations carried out by the Public Health Directorates. This fact shows that the measures imposed by the Government have managed to limit and keep under control the evolution of Coronavirus infections in our country.
However, Romania remains exposed to the risks of spreading the COVID-19 virus and needs a stable Government with all the legal and constitutional tools available to cope with the unpredictable international and national developments generated by this pandemic.
Ladies and gentlemen,
The Liberal National Party has taken on this difficult task of governing in difficult times for the country and with a new Government, with full powers, I am convinced that it will manage to best manage the situation caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The government will prioritize the budgetary resources necessary for the purchase in a simplified emergency procedure of sanitary materials and medical equipment necessary for the prevention and control of COVID-19 infections.
At the same time, the institutions involved in managing the risks of spreading the Coronavirus epidemic will be mobilized to the maximum capacity with the budgetary, material and human resources available for the control, monitoring and support of persons exposed to the risks of COVID-19 infection.
I call, and on this occasion, to involve everyone, public, central and local institutions, companies and non-governmental organizations, citizens of all ages, to prove that we are a country of responsible people, united in the fight with a new threat. and unknown.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Sooner or later, we hope as soon as possible, the Coronavirus pandemic will pass, but the immediate negative social and economic effects can be long-term in the absence of appropriate measures to limit the economic risks for companies and employees in Romania.
At the level of the Government, together with the Presidential Administration and the other public institutions with competences in the economic and financial field, a wide consultation and an in-depth analysis of the economic sectors most exposed to the effects of the Coronavirus epidemic was carried out and a follow-up will be adopted. Plan of measures to combat the economic risks generated by the COVID-19 pandemic in our country.
The government will use all possible resources from public and European funds, reimbursable and non-reimbursable, to support the economic environment affected by the global Coronavirus crisis.
We will initiate negotiations with the European Commission, international financial institutions and local banking entities to prepare support programs for Romanian companies.
At the same time, the payment obligations of the state to citizens and companies will be honored without delay and without any bureaucratic delay. On the contrary, as far as possible, various fiscal and budgetary obligations due to the natural and legal persons in Romania will be compensated or postponed.
No Romanian citizen, no Romanian company and no Romanian employee will be left alone by the Romanian Government in the face of the global economic risks caused by COVID-19.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Everyone has their time and every thing has its time.
In these difficult times for the country, it is time for the political battles to cease and the responsibility of each of us to receive in front of personal or party interests.
Our individual and each Romanian political responsibility is the most important antidote against the spread of Coronavirus infections. That is why, on behalf of the Government I have proposed, I ask for your responsibility and the investment vote to pass the country together through this crisis.
Thank you!