Good evening and thanks to the media for appearing or coming to this press appearance. As you all know, I just participated in an extraordinary meeting of the European Council that was held by videoconference. We have addressed the coronavirus crisis 19 and I can tell you that in the coming days the European Commission and also the Eurogroup will announce different packages of joint economic and financial measures. But about Europe if you like, I'll talk to you later.
As you know, we are facing a global health emergency that already affects more than one hundred countries and therefore requires a coordinated and multilateral response. This emergency has an obvious health dimension to which we are paying the main attention, care and protection to the lives of our compatriots and particularly of the elderly. But it also has an economic dimension that was discussed today in the extraordinary European Council due to the consequences that the health crisis is having on production, distribution, transport and also on the finances of the world's largest economies.
In the face of a global emergency, as I have said before, effective responses must also be global, international and it is this comprehensive response, at the global level but also at the European and national level, that is essential to defeat the virus.
Let me first refer to how we have been addressing the health dimension of the problem since January from the Government of Spain. And I will begin by explaining the criteria followed at all times. The first, the Minister of Health has said on many occasions, has been to entrust the technical direction to the experts. It is the scientific experts who have to show us the way. Both the experts from the World Health Organization, with whom the director had the opportunity to speak in recent days, as well as experts from Europe and national and regional experts in our own field. All the decisions that have been made and that will be made in this crisis will strictly obey scientific criteria.
The second pillar has been continuous monitoring of the situation to make proportional decisions at all times. This is important to underline because the scenarios are not static, the scenarios are dynamic and, consequently, it has been precisely this daily monitoring, schedule which has provided that the Government of Spain and also the set of Public Administrations have adopted measures in an agile and overwhelming.
The third is maximum coordination. You know that in our autonomous system we have the powers of public health residing in the autonomous governments and therefore that coordination is essential with each and every Administration, in particular with the autonomous communities. And also that coordination at European level with our partners, with the rest of the Member States.
Finally, the fourth criterion is that of total transparency of information. This has governed communication by the Government and in this case also by the Ministry of Health.
We are consequently facing a health emergency that we are going to overcome and that is going to cost us, that we are going to have difficult, hard weeks but that we are going to overcome and we are going to achieve it before and with the least possible damage if each one of the members of Society, from civil society to all administrations, we assume our role. And that role is, first of all, that experts and scientists advise us on measures and advise us on solutions.
Secondly, governments and policy makers must decide and execute in full coordination between different administrations and in full harmony with what the scientific experts advise us.
Thirdly, civil society, to which I appeal both to companies and to the general public, we must cooperate following the recommendations emanating from the experts. In particular, it is the responsibility of the entire population to take extreme hygiene measures, to follow the instructions on social contacts to the letter and to give priority to the care of the most vulnerable people who, as they know, are those who have other ailments and less defenses. of health.
In coherence with these rules, the Government of Spain has established the direction of this response to the coronavirus in the Ministry of Health and in this department different mechanisms of direction and coordination have been created that always follow dictated criteria, I insist because this is important for the experts.
Firstly, a technical follow-up commission that meets at the Ministry of Health twice a day in the morning and in the afternoon. You and the public as a whole have witnessed this because there are press conferences in the morning and in the afternoon, giving absolute transparency to the evolution of the public health crisis.
Secondly, on Wednesdays an inter-ministerial meeting has been held to reinforce the coordination of the Executive of the Government of Spain and two weekly meetings have been regularly scheduled, and I want to give this special relevance because it is held by the Inter-Ministerial Commission of the Health in our country to precisely strengthen the close relationship between the Government of Spain and the set of autonomous governments.
This is the monitoring and decision-making mechanism that we have been recording and developing since the first minute of the crisis back in January. And through this mechanism, decisions and recommendations that you know and that are adapted to each moment and to the seriousness of the problem in each place have been adopted and adopted.
Consequently, I want to send a message of confidence to all Spaniards, to all citizens, a message of unity of serenity and stability. But if you want, I will be even clearer with a determination that is maximum on the part of the Government of Spain. To combat this public health emergency, we will do what is needed, where it is needed and when it is needed. And together, have no doubt, we will overcome this crisis.
Allow me also to turn now to the response of the economic dimension that you undoubtedly have, of the emergency that we are experiencing. The economic emergency, derived from the coronavirus crisis and as a consequence of the response that we have to give to the set of institutions and the private sector. Regarding Europe and its response to which I referred earlier, at the beginning of my speech, indicate that the Government of Spain has advocated coordinated action, both health and economic. And that I have asked the European institutions to provide mechanisms to provide sufficient liquidity to small and medium-sized companies, which may suffer as a consequence of the negative economic side of this public health crisis derived from the coronavirus. In other words, we have defended before the Government of Europe, before the European institutions, that mechanisms be provided to provide sufficient liquidity to small and medium-sized companies on our continent and also our country accordingly.
Likewise, we hope that for the countries of the European Union, the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact can be relaxed, insofar as we are going to logically need to restore the supply chains that may have been affected, take measures related to politics especially to strengthen the front line right now, in this fight, in this fight that is the public health system.
Other ideas have been put on the table. Today in the extraordinary council of European funds to help affected citizens, for example those who have lost their jobs, which the Commission has promised to study over the next few days.
And for our part, on the part of the Government of Spain, we have been working for weeks now in the elaboration of an economic plan of shock against the effects of this emergency. I have known, and this must also be taken with extreme caution because obviously the economic data changes daily as a consequence of the evolution of the public health crisis, I have learned that different international organizations such as the OECD with whom I have had the opportunity to be able Today, meeting with the Secretary General, the highest representative and head of the OECD, have made quantitative estimates of the economic impact of this emergency in each geographical area. All forecasts indicate that this consequence will be serious, that impact and, consequently, that it will also be transitory. It will be forceful, it will be serious, but it will also be transitory. As I have said before, it is complex to make a much more precise economic quantification of the economic impact of this crisis because we do not have certainty and that is what the duration of this crisis will be.
We do know that there are sectors that already blame its effects, such as certain service sectors and others that may be affected shortly by the rupture of the supply chain if it finally occurs.
In any case, on Thursday a meeting is planned with the social agents, with the employers and with the unions to join them in response to the economic emergency, concluding a series of measures that avoid irreparable damage to the affected companies and also to logically mitigate the effects on men and women workers and small and medium entrepreneurs.
I announce that the shock plan that the Government of Spain was working on and that we are logically also going to reach a consensus with the social agents, will include measures in four main areas that we are going to approve throughout this week also online, and this is important underline it, with what will be approved at European level by the European Commission and the Eurogroup.
The four areas of action of this shock plan will be first: the action of dedicating resources to protect and guarantee the well-being of Spanish families, particularly working families. We are going to support them in this difficult, complex situation, facilitating the reduction of working hours, through aid for the care of minors derived from closings of educational centers, as we have seen yesterday in some autonomous communities.
Therefore, protect and guarantee the well-being of Spanish families, particularly working families that are logically affected by the decisions that are being made to close educational centers. Secondly, measures to guarantee the supply and production of medicines and access to medical supplies. Thirdly, measures to protect employment in sectors that suffer temporary drops in demand. For this we are going to adopt labor flexibility procedures, so that companies can face these production or health difficulties without resorting to layoffs, by reducing working hours or temporary adjustments. And at the same time we will be vigilant so that no one can make inappropriate use of this type of measure to the detriment of labor rights. Fourth, we are going to put all our efforts and all the necessary resources to support the liquidity of small and medium-sized companies in the productive sector of our country.
We will implement lines of credit to facilitate liquidity for companies and we will adopt measures to facilitate compliance with companies' tax obligations through deferrals and moratoriums. We are not going to allow temporary liquidity tensions to become solvency problems for our companies.
Therefore, and this is important, very important, we are going to give decisive support in liquidity to the productive fabric of our country and, in particular, to small and medium-sized companies, and finally, we are going to consider some specific measures in the field of tourism and transport. , which are two very relevant and sensitive sectors to the current situation and that will receive specific support.
In short, these are generally very thoughtful measures and actions, adapted to the difficulties that are arising -or those that may arise- in various areas of the economy. It is capital that our economic fabric resists this emergency and that it can relaunch its activity as soon as the most intense phase of the health crisis is overcome. I insist that they will be forceful economic measures, they will be measures of firm and determined support for our productive sector and for our workers, but we must be aware that this is going to be a crisis that we hope will be temporary and that among all countries and also among all administrations we can put a stop to it as soon as possible.
And before concluding, let me make a couple of reflections on what this emergency means for our country and on how, in my opinion, we must face it. Look, to overcome a health threat such as the coronavirus two conditions are required: a robust, effective health system and a united response, coordinated by all: experts, political decision-makers of all citizens.
Fortunately we meet the first condition. We have one of the best sanitary systems in the world. We have 330,000 medical and nursing professionals who provide their services in 466 hospitals and 13,000 primary care centers.
They are numerous professionals (we have a ratio of doctors per inhabitant higher than the European measure) and above all they are very well trained, and they are very competent and capable. They support one of the most prestigious and efficient healthcare systems in the world according to all specialized indicators. They are the safest shield we have against common diseases and also in the event of a health emergency like the current one.
They are a source of pride as a country and also a security shell in situations like the one we are going through and as Prime Minister I want to recognize their work and show solidarity with their work in these weeks of as much pressure as I am convinced they are suffering.
The second condition that I told you before is to give a united and coordinated response among all. We are facing a large health crisis and there is no room for individual, compartmentalized solutions. The emergency affects us all and we must all face it together because it is up to us, we must give the direction to the experts.
Faced with this problem, there are no opinions or colors: what counts is science and knowledge. We must collaborate side by side (and in this sense let me say that the government of Spain has coordinated a government of different sign, such as the CAM and the Basque Country.
Citizens have an essential role. Each person, each compatriot, can greatly help to overcome the coronavirus emergency by acting responsibly: strictly following the recommendations of the experts and the authorities. Every person who follows the rules must know that they are protecting their health and that of their family, colleagues, neighbors, and fellow citizens.
Before concluding, please allow me to say a few words to people affected by the disease in order to wish them a full and speedy recovery as well as my condolences with the relatives of those who died of the virus. The Government of Spain is and will be with all of them.
I began my intervention with a reference to the people who work on the front line and I did it with pride and would like to end by addressing all Spanish citizens to ensure that the Government, the Autonomous Communities and all public administrations are promptly complying with their task, taking measures that generate social and economic certainty and adequate reaction capacity to the scale of the challenge that lies ahead.
We are all aware that this crisis, in addition to a matter of public health and of uncertainty and economic instability, is causing a disruption in the most common habits of our society. But from all this we will come out united and reinforced, I have no doubt.
The waiting room of a hospital does not understand ways of thinking, nor colors, nor ideology, nor gender. The virus affects people without asking where they are born, where they live, or what they think. This problem affects us all as a country and as a country, in unity and in full coordination and cooperation, we are facing it.
Because these days, the example of coordination of public powers of any ideological color, the lesson of effort and professionalism of health workers, and the faultless behavior of all Spanish citizens, gathered around the common interest, the general interest, demonstrate once again that Spain is a country capable of facing the most difficult challenges with unity and with guarantees of success.