Dear compatriots:

During these two years of Government, the Peruvians have faced various difficulties that have put to the test our capacity, our strength and our commitment to the Homeland.

We assume the reins of the country in the midst of a serious political and institutional crisis. The high levels of corruption, the discredit of the institutions and the loss of confidence, demanded firm and decisive actions, without which it would not have been possible to continue. But we did it together.

Despite the fact that, at the time, many of these decisions were considered extreme, they were necessary to move the country forward.

I assumed the position of President of the Republic for a responsibility with Peru. And in each of the problems we face, we have always made the best decision, thinking about the well-being of all.

For this reason, I address you tonight, accompanied by the plenary session of the Council of Ministers, the representatives of the National Assembly of Regional Governments and the Association of Municipalities of Peru, in a difficult circumstance, like many that we have had to live through. throughout our history.

In recent days, COVID-19 has spread to various countries around the world, which has led the World Health Organization to declare it a pandemic, and different nations to adopt extreme measures to slow the spread of this disease.

According to the World Health Organization, there are around 160,000 cases of coronavirus spread in more than 140 countries around the world. The death toll is over 6,400 people. In Peru, to date, we have 71 cases, most of which are citizens who were in Europe.
But, there are people who have contracted the disease within the territory, that is, they had contact with those affected. Faced with this situation, my Government has been adopting a set of measures to deal with the coronavirus, with the clear conviction that the health and integrity of Peruvians are above all and must be preserved in the best possible way.

We are at the risk that this virus may spread in our territory, which would make it even more difficult to face.

Therefore, after making a serious and responsible evaluation, and holding coordination meetings with ministers and authorities from the three levels of government, we have unanimously approved a Supreme Decree in the Council of Ministers that declares a state of national emergency. for the serious circumstances that affect the life of the Nation as a result of the coronavirus.

This measure, which will be in force for 15 calendar days, implies the obligatory social isolation of our population.

During this period, we guarantee the supply of food, medicine, as well as the continuity of water, sanitation, electricity, gas, fuel, telecommunications, cleaning, solid waste collection, funeral services and others.

The National Police and the Armed Forces will adopt measures to guarantee public services.
During the State of Emergency, the exercise of constitutional rights related to personal liberty and security, inviolability of the home, and freedom of assembly and transit in the national territory are restricted.

It is established that people can only circulate through public use roads for the provision and access to essential services and goods such as:

a) Acquisition, production and supply of food, which includes its storage and distribution for sale to the public.

b) Acquisition, production and supply of pharmaceutical and basic necessity products.

c) Assistance to health centers, services and establishments, as well as diagnostic centers, in cases of emergencies.

d) Return to the place of habitual residence.

e) Assistance and care for older adults, girls, boys, adolescents, dependents, people with disabilities or people in vulnerable situations.
f) Financial entities, insurance and pensions, as well as complementary and related services that guarantee its proper functioning.

g) Production, storage, transportation, distribution and sale of fuel.

h) Media and telephone service centers.

During the State of emergency, the total closure of the borders is ordered, by virtue of which the international transportation of passengers, by land, air, sea and river, is suspended. The transport of cargo and merchandise is not included in it.

I want to emphasize, once again, that these measures in no way contemplate the closure of commercial establishments of basic necessities, pharmacies or banks, which will continue to operate and will be permanently supplied.

In this sense, we have the effort of the business sector that is committed to guaranteeing the chain of production and distribution of food, cleaning products and personal hygiene throughout the country. As a State, we will facilitate the corresponding logistics processes.

We must act with serenity, responsibility and solidarity, always thinking of the general welfare.

In order to allow the fulfillment of the obligatory social isolation, we are adopting a series of measures, such as carrying out the taking of samples at home for people who present symptoms of coronavirus; which will go
accompanied by the strengthening of the telephone exchange of Line 113 and greater resources for the management and treatment of municipal and bio-contaminated waste. Also, public and private sector employers are empowered to modify the place of provision of services for all their workers, using means or mechanisms that make it possible.

This is a circumstance in which our health personnel play a fundamental role and as a State we have the obligation to recognize. For this reason, we are authorizing, in an exceptional way, the granting of an extraordinary bonus for health personnel and contracted personnel who provide alert and response services in Intensive Care Units, Hospitalization or those who carry out epidemiological surveillance and home visits to patients receiving outpatient care.

Likewise, an extraordinary Bonus will be awarded for the effective work of the Social Security Health care personnel.

The Government is aware that the extreme measure that we have ordered today puts many families in a complex situation, but we are and will be here to help them cope.

We have a duty and an obligation to protect, especially, the most vulnerable people, such as our older adults. We must do it at home and throughout the country. For this, we are authorizing a transfer of 40 million soles in favor of the Ministry of Development and Social Inclusion, for the organization and development of a Support Network for the Elderly with High Risk and the Person with Severe Disabilities.
n this sense, the Ministries of Health and of Women and Vulnerable Populations, as well as regional and local governments, will also have the resources to finance the development of a service for home visits and nominal monitoring in their respective jurisdictions.

The Government, in addition to addressing the health problem, is committed to helping and accompanying the most vulnerable families. This is why we make sure that we can all successfully pass this tough period. The Executive will provide resources, exceptionally, to the families most in need so that they can comply with the measure.

We will inform in the coming days the procedure for accessing State aid.

Dear compatriots:

Just 9 days ago we announced the first case of coronavirus infection in Peru. Today there are 71. The adoption of these measures does not mean that they will stop increasing the number of those affected, but we have to make the decision so that, in this 15-day period, the cases will begin to decrease. If we do not take these measures, the promotion would be constant and permanent.

For this reason, I reaffirm that this is a circumstance that requires urgent and extreme decisions, however difficult they may be, but absolutely necessary.

The measures we are announcing today will bring difficulties, we are aware of this. But rest assured that if you do not take them, the consequences would be worse for everyone.

We know that the effects of this measure are going to be difficult to deal with, but you must be sure that we have taken it because it is the best for each Peruvian.

As Government and as State we continue to deploy all our human, material and budgetary capacities to face this emergency. I have said it and today I repeat it: we will spare no effort because health is the most precious asset that we all have.

We are sure that we will be able to overcome this difficult circumstance and soon we will restart the growth of the country, and we will resume the course of development and progress of our Homeland.

Thanks so much and good night.