Mr. President,
Ladies and gentlemen,
At this moment, when the world is confronted with the threat posed by the new coronavirus, I want to address to all Portuguese people a call for vigilance and the adoption of responsible behavior, but also a message of serenity and confidence in our public health authorities and at the National Health Service.
As is well known, Portugal registered the first positive cases of Covid-19 disease earlier this week. And my first word is of solidarity with those who are sick or infected by the virus, as well as their family and friends.
From the first hour, everything has been done to ensure an adequate response and to ensure that we prepare the best possible way to face this epidemic.
This was what we did, right away, in the operation to repatriate the Portuguese who were in Wuhan and, subsequently, in creating conditions for them to remain in prophylactic isolation for 14 days. As well as diplomatic support provided to our fellow citizens who were on the boat moored in Japan.
Meanwhile, the Directorate-General for Health has been putting in place a gradual and proportional response device.
On January 31, a task force for the disease caused by the new coronavirus (COVID-19) was created. Three referral hospitals were immediately activated: Curry Cabral, Dona Estefânia and São João, which I had the opportunity to visit just yesterday, having seen the professionalism, normality and sense of responsibility with which she is responding to this situation. INEM has reserved dedicated ambulances to transport patients suspected of having contracted the virus. Linha Saúde 24 was reinforced with over 100 nurses and a new Physician Support Line was created, which has proved essential in clarifying and advising health professionals, as well as in validating suspected cases.
The National Council for Public Health was called, a vital organ for framing the decisions to be taken in the face of epidemic outbreaks of Big scale. And the Directorate-General for Health has been issuing a set of technical guidelines regarding the prevention, control and surveillance measures to be adopted at this stage, in various areas of activity, namely with regard to workplaces or maritime transport and air.
On flights from China and, more recently, from Italy, some preventive measures are already in place, namely the collection of contacts from passengers with a view to locating them in case of need.
With five positive cases so far, we are still in a phase of containment of the epidemic, although it is already an extended containment. This means that the resources initially mobilized have been progressively reinforced. As a result, 4 second-line hospitals have already been activated and another 6 hospitals are ready. About 2,000 isolation beds that can be made available are identified, 300 of which are in intensive care. There are already 8 laboratories qualified to carry out tests on the new coronavirus.
The SNS has a strategic reserve of 2 million masks and other personal protective equipment, to which is added a stock of 1.6 million masks from the Portuguese Red Cross, which are destined to be used mainly by health professionals and infected or under evaluation people, since its use by the general population is not advised. The stock of medicines in the NHS was also increased by about 20%.
But, in addition to the health system, there are other areas in which it is important to be prepared. For this reason, a dispatch was issued last Monday, stating that all public services must prepare, within five working days, specific contingency plans, in the light of the technical guidelines defined by the Directorate-General for Health.
Just yesterday, the National Commission for Civil Protection met to assess the level of readiness and define the prevention, preparedness and response actions that all competent entities must adopt in the various possible scenarios for the evolution of this epidemic. This Commission is now in permanent operation to monitor the evolution of the situation and to take the measures that, at each moment, prove to be appropriate.
In another plan, we also wanted to safeguard the labor rights of those who, for reasons of public health, are unable or not to attend their respective workplaces, by decision of a public health authority, continuing to receive his salary in full, both in the public and private sectors.
Mr. President,
Ladies and gentlemen,
We are aware of the negative impact that the current epidemic could also have on the behavior of the world economy, particularly in the tourism sector. The Eurogroup, which met today by teleconference, is closely monitoring economic and financial developments, together with the European Commission and the ECB, and is willing to use all the flexibility of the Stability and Growth Pact in order to have a coordinated response.
In Portugal, we will release the new growth estimates for 2020 and the following years until April 15th, and we will not fail to reflect this risk in the projection to be presented. In any case, it is important to remember that the Portuguese economy was the one that best resisted the economic slowdown of 2019, even though it was the economy whose growth accelerated most at the end of the year, which allows us to face the current situation with serenity.  The Minister of State, Economy and Digital Transition has already had the opportunity to meet with the main business associations to assess the situation and look for ways to minimize the effects of this epidemic. So far, the economic impact for Portuguese companies has been moderate or reduced. Significant declines in component supply chains are not expected, not least because China is already resuming its industrial activity. Only in the tourism, travel and events sector, there has been a drop in demand and some cancellations, the impact of which will truly depend on the duration and severity of the epidemic outbreak. We will therefore continue to monitor the situation and, if necessary, we are in a position to launch a credit line for treasury support to companies in the initial amount of 100 million Euros.
Mr. President,
Ladies and gentlemen,
The public health priority, at this moment, must be the prevention of the risks of contagion, with a view to containing the epidemic.
The protocol of action may vary, depending on the seriousness of the situation and the evolution that the epidemic will have in our country, since hospitalization, prophylactic isolation at home or even quarantine as determined by the competent authorities. Both the Basic Health Law, in its Base 34, and the Law 81/2009, provide for the possibility, exceptionally, of “separating people who are not sick ... in order to avoid the possible spread of infection or contamination ”. There is, therefore, a legal framework for the adoption of measures that prove necessary to prevent contagion in a scenario of community transmission of the virus.
Such measures must always observe the principle of proportionality, being adopted gradually and only if necessary. Even because the worst virus is the social alarm.
In this regard, I want to praise the civic spirit that the Portuguese have shown and the sense of responsibility with which they have been able to deal with this phenomenon. I also want to thank all the efforts and mobilization of health professionals, which I have been able to witness directly on several occasions over the past few days, and express full confidence in their work.