Dear Compatriots:
 
The CoronaVirus emerged in China late last year, has spread rapidly throughout the world, and is today the most serious threat to humanity in more than a century.
 
Today there are 132 thousand cases of proven infections, the majority in China, Korea and Italy, which have caused 4,955 unfortunate deaths worldwide, and these numbers are and will continue to grow.
 
Today there are 43 cases of proven contagion in Chile. So far all of them are traceable, none are at vital risk and we should not have regretted loss of life.
 
The CoronaVirus, which gives rise to the disease called COVID19, develops in 4 stages. The first, when there are no proven cases. The second when all cases of contagion occurred abroad. The third when the contagion cases that occurred abroad and in Chile are no longer traceable. And the fourth when this traceability is lost and the most complex stage of viral circulation and community diffusion begins.
 
Chilean and Chilean:
 
Today I must report that Chile is in full and imminent transition to stage 3, and according to experts, it is highly likely that we will reach stage 4. Consequently, we must prepare ourselves to face the most difficult stages of this epidemic, which requires the unity and collaboration of all and always putting the health of Chileans as our first priority.
 
As soon as we knew of the CoronaVirus cases that occurred in China, our Government began preparing to adequately confront this disease and effectively protect the health of all Chileans. This is how, early in the month of January, together with the Minister of Health, we formed a work team to take all the necessary measures and prepare an Action Plan to adequately confront the looming crisis.
 
These measures included the purchase of the necessary supplies and equipment. The implementation of the Laboratory Line to carry out the diagnoses. The establishment of an early Health Alert to grant the Ministry of Health the resources and powers necessary to adequately face this emergency and the preparation of a Plan to face the most difficult stages of this pandemic, which are likely to occur this fall and winter. We also started a policy of sanitary protection of our borders and strengthening of our hospital capacity, through the strengthening of health personnel, the appointment of 50 hospitals to face the emergency, the early start-up of 5 hospitals in Ovalle, Viña, Metropolitan Region, Padre Las Casas and Angol, planning to have fast-building hospitals and the anticipation and strengthening of the Influenza Vaccination Campaign, which starts this Monday and will allow vaccinating 8 million citizens, and many other measures and actions that are already underway.
This plan has had the valuable collaboration of a distinguished Group of Experts, its planning and execution has been done with total transparency and its success requires the contribution and collaboration of all Chileans, because given the contagious nature of this disease, it is imperative that we all not only take care of ourselves, but also take care of others.
 
The fact that the 43 proven cases of Corona Virus in Chile, which will undoubtedly increase rapidly, have so far been benign, reflects that the plan is working. In fact, the level of surveillance of this epidemic and the protection of the health of our compatriots has been widely valued and recognized by international health authorities and has been based on scientific information, the recommendations of the World Health Organization and the best experiences from friendly countries.
 
Currently the Ministry of Health has more than 2,000 people at risk of contagion in monitoring and observation. This strict vigilance will be maintained and increased, in order to mitigate the effects of the disease and distance it over time so as not to saturate our health system.
 
Dear compatriots, difficult times are coming in terms of health. Before yesterday, the World Health Organization defined the CoronaVirus as a Pandemic due to its rapid and massive worldwide spread.
 
We know that the CoronaVirus is three times more contagious and more than 10 times more lethal than the human H1N1 fever that affected us in 2009. We also know that the greater life risk of this disease affects older adults and those with chronic diseases such as diabetes, hypertension or respiratory disorders, which require very special care. And that in the case of children, youth and adults the prognosis is more benign, manifesting the disease in forms that range from the common cold to pneumonia.
 
We know that so far there are no vaccines or treatments for this disease, so public health control measures and isolation of patients are the best instruments to manage this epidemic.
 
We also know that many Chileans feel fear and anguish in the face of this pandemic. We understand those fears and anxieties and that is why we are committed to doing everything humanly possible to mitigate the effects of this disease.
 
However, the speed and intensity with which this epidemic is affecting the entire world, and particularly Europe and Latin American countries, make it necessary to adopt new measures to protect the health of all Chileans, which will be adjusted according to evolution of the disease and have special emphasis on 6 priority areas:
EDUCATION
 
In the current phase, both at the early, school and higher education levels, the following will apply:
 
14-day isolation for any member of an educational community who has a direct family member with confirmed contagion.
Suspension of classes for 14 days of the complete course when a student has confirmed contagion.
Suspension of classes for 14 days of the entire educational establishment in the case of two or more cases of students with confirmed contagion.
 
These measures may be modified or extended to specific territories, such as communes and regions, as necessary.
 
To promote the continuity of the educational process we are promoting remote education or remote education technologies, through an online platform that will be available to all students in the country through the Ministry of Education. Additionally, JUNAEB will offer alternative food services for affected students and those who require it.
 
B. HEALTH
 
Medical licenses
 
Workers who have had proven close contact with confirmed cases of COVID-19 and other qualified workers who must undergo mandatory quarantines will be entitled to medical licenses.
 
Diagnostics
 
We have the capacity to carry out the CoronaVirus diagnostic test to those who require it, which will be free for all Fonasa beneficiaries who take it on the Public Network.
 
Hospital Capacity
 
We have strengthened hospital capacity. We currently have 38,000 beds, which we have increased by 1,732 beds. Additionally, and with the support of the Armed Forces, we will have a field hospital, 6 medical attention posts (PAME) and the services of the Sargento Aldea Hospital Ship.
 
We will create a fund of 220 billion pesos to finance the purchase of necessary supplies and equipment, the strengthening of the operation of hospitals and diagnostic laboratories, the extension of office hours, the provision of additional beds, the hospitals of accelerated construction, Armed Forces hospitals and other needs.
 
MASSIVE EVENTS
 
Following the recommendations of the WHO, from this Monday all public events with more than 500 people throughout the country will be banned. We have already had to cancel events like ExpoMin, Lollapalooza, Fidae and many others.
CONTROL OF OUR BORDERS
 
To prevent the importation and spread of this virus and protect the health of Chileans, we have decided that all people from countries classified as High Risk by the World Health Organization will have to be in a 14-day quarantine upon entering the country. These measures do not affect those who have only passed through the airports of these countries or flight crews.
 
Furthermore, we are implementing greater sanitary control at all our land borders. Along with the Sworn Declaration, we will establish Sanitary Customs through a Medical Exam to diagnose the state of health and based on this, allow or deny their entry into the country.
 
CATERING
 
To guarantee the normal supply of Chileans, we will continue taking all necessary measures.
 
TRANSPORT
 
Our public transport will continue to function normally to ensure the movement of Chileans, but with greater sanitation measures, through periodic disinfection of the metro, urban public transport buses and passenger trains.
 
ADDITIONAL MEASURES
 
1. I have issued a PRESIDENTIAL INSTRUCTION with various measures to protect workers in the Public Sector, among which the following stand out:
- All public officials over the age of 75 or who are part of a risk group may carry out their work from home.
 
- The Heads of Service of the State administration may establish special measures to adopt flexible working hours and encourage teleworking.
 
- Only the necessary ceremonies, events or public acts will be held with a maximum participation of 100 people.
 
- Restrict travel abroad by public officials to those that are essential.
 
2. We will extend the validity of identity cards for one year, to avoid that people must go to the Civil Registry offices and online procedures will be facilitated.
 
3. We will put maximum urgency on the Telecommuting Bill for the private sector, which will help protect the health of workers.
 
We are in permanent coordination with the countries of Prosur and in the coming days we will hold a video conference with the Presidents of Prosur, to strengthen collaboration in our region.
5. In accordance with the Constitution, I have designated the Minister of Health as Interministerial Coordinator of the Plan to Protect Chileans from Coronavirus.
 
To be successful in this campaign, the collaboration and responsibility of all, self-care and the care of others is essential.
 
To protect lives I ask my compatriots that during this emergency:
 
Wash their hands frequently with soap or alcohol gel.
 
Let's innovate with new ways of greeting that avoid direct contact of hands and faces.
 
3. And keep, as much as possible, a distance of one meter with other people.
 
Chilean and Chilean:
 
We are convinced that it is essential to keep all citizens truthful and timely informed. For these reasons, all these measures and future changes or additions will be incorporated into an official Coronavirus Website, available at gob.cl.
 
We are working on a campaign that allows all citizens to have the necessary information to take the best practices to adopt. In addition, we are working with Facebook and Google to facilitate access to official information through their platforms and with South Korea, to develop an App that allows personalized contact with our citizens.
 
Dear compatriots:
 
I fully trust that all Chileans will know how to face with unity and generosity this serious threat to the health of our citizens, whose protection constitutes the first priority and concern of our Government and of this President.
 
May God Bless Chile and Chileans. Let's take care of our health and our democracy.
 
Good evening and thank you very much.