"I would like to start by thanking first of all, once again, the doctors, the health workers, the researchers who as I speak to you are working tirelessly in hospitals to fight the health emergency, to treat our patients.
My thanks also go to all of you, who are respecting the measures that the government has taken to counter the spread of the virus.
I thank you because I know that you are changing your life habits, you are making sacrifices, I know that it is not easy, but you know that with this renunciations - small or large - they are making a great valuable contribution to the country.
Italy, we can say it strong, with pride, is proving to be a great nation, a great community, united and responsible.
At this moment the whole world is looking at us: they certainly look at us for the numbers of the infection, they see a country in difficulty. But they also appreciate us because we are showing great vigor, great resistance.
And I have a deep conviction - and I would like to share it with you - tomorrow not only will they look at us again, and they will admire us, they will take us as a positive example of a country that, thanks to its sense of community, has managed to win its battle against this pandemic .
We are, I remember, the country that was the first in Europe to be hit hardest by the coronavirus, but we are also the ones that are reacting with the greatest force and with the utmost precaution, becoming day after day a model for everyone else too .
To govern means to have a 360 degree vision: this challenge, we now know it well,
it concerns citizens' health, it is a challenge that puts a strain on our national health system, but it also concerns the stability of our economy, of our productive fabric made up of small and medium-sized enterprises. In the choices I have made so far, we have taken into account, together with all the ministers, all interests, all the values at stake.
I made a pact with my conscience. In the first place there is and there will always be the health of Italians.
Just a few days ago I asked you to change your deep-rooted life habits, staying at home as much as possible, leaving only what is strictly necessary.
The vast majority of you Italians responded in an extraordinary way.
When I adopted these measures - which also limit some of our beloved freedoms - I was aware that it was a first step and reasonably would not have been the last.
that a further step would be needed shortly.
Today, it is clear, we are aware that in a large, modern, complex country, like ours, we must proceed gradually so that everyone can understand the difficult moment we are experiencing and also prepare to accept the changes required.
Now, this is the time to go one step further.
The most important one.
Italy will always remain a unique area. Protected Italy.
But now we also have the closure of all commercial, retail activities, with the exception of grocery stores, basic necessities, pharmacies and parapharmacies.
No rush, be careful, there is no need to rush to buy food in supermarkets. However, we close shops, bars, pubs, restaurants, leaving the possibility of making home deliveries.
Hairdressers, beauty centers also close, canteen services that do not guarantee the safety distance of 1 meter close.
As far as production and professional activities are concerned, agile work must be implemented as much as possible, holidays, paid leave for employees must be encouraged.
The company departments remain closed and are not indispensable for production. Industries, factories, will obviously be able to continue to carry out their production activities on condition that they adopt adequate safety protocols to protect their workers in order to avoid contagion. Factories and industries are encouraged to put in place measures that are adequate to withstand this moment. Then regulation of work shifts, early holidays, closure of non-essential departments.
Obviously, the performance of essential public services, including transport, public utility services of banking, postal, financial and insurance services, as well as all those activities which are necessary, however ancillary, with respect to the correct functioning of the sectors remaining in operation remains guaranteed.
The activities of the agricultural, zootechnical and agri-food processing sectors will be guaranteed, including the supply chains that offer goods and services with respect to these activities, therefore they will continue their activities in compliance, of course, with respect to hygiene and health regulations.
The mother rule remains the same: we must limit travel to work, for health reasons, or for reasons of necessity such as shopping.
It is important to be aware that we have recently started to change our habits, we can only see the effect of our great effort in a few weeks, a couple of weeks.
So no one should think that tomorrow, in the next few days, we will be able to measure the impact of these measures. To get feedback we will have to wait a couple of weeks. And this is very important, so I want to say it: if the numbers were to continue to grow - which is by no means improbable - it does not mean that we will have to hurry to launch new measures immediately. We must not make a blind run to the abyss, we must be lucid, measured, rigorous, responsible.
Soon I will appoint a delegated commissioner to strengthen the response of hospitals to this health emergency. He will be a commissioner who will have broad derogation powers, who will work
to strengthen production above all, the distribution of equipment for intensive and sub-intensive care will also have the power to create new factories, to set up new factories for the production of these equipments and to make up for the shortcomings found so far.
The person I will appoint will be Dr. Domenico Arcuri, who is the CEO of Invitalia, and this already consolidated structure, already expert in the industrial sector, will take place.
We will coordinate with dr. Borrelli and with the current structure of the Civil Protection. Allow me to open a parenthesis and to thank all the men and women of the Civil Protection, dr. Borrelli for the incredible work they are doing so far.
And I want to tell you one last thing: if we all respect these rules, we will get out of this emergency faster.
The country needs the responsibility of each of us, the responsibility of 60 million Italians who make small sacrifices daily. For the duration of this emergency. We are part of the same community.
Each individual is taking advantage of his own but also of others' sacrifices. This is the strength of our country, a "community of individuals" as Norbert Elias would say.
Let's stay away today to embrace each other more warmly, to run faster tomorrow. All together we will make it. "