Dear Argentine people,

I will share with you important information about the coronavirus.

Yesterday the WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION (WHO), declared the outbreak of the new coronavirus as a pandemic, after the number of infected people globally exceeded 118,000 distributed so far in 110 countries.

I want you to know what we are doing to respond to the advance of this virus that spreads every day throughout the world.

In situations of generalized alarm, the role of the State is essential to prevent, reassure and provide protection to the population.

A present State in health matters is the best way to care for the population.

The reality is that this pandemic calls us as a society.

It calls us to the National State, to each province, to each municipality.

To each and every one.

For this reason, I issued a Decree of Necessity and Urgency that expands the public emergency in health matters.

It gives powers of action and prevention to different ministries. Among them, avoid shortages and set maximum prices for alcohol gel, chinstraps and other critical supplies.

It also allows for the preventive suspension of shows and the closure of public spaces.

This Decree suspends flights from Europe, the United States, South Korea, Japan, China and Iran for 30 days.

In the framework of this restriction, it provides that measures will be implemented to facilitate the return from those countries of residents in Argentina.

It also provides mandatory isolation for 14 days in four cases:
Of those with a confirmed diagnosis of Coronavirus.
Of those people considered "suspicious cases", that is, people who have a fever, and one or more of the following respiratory symptoms: cough, sore throat or difficulty breathing, and who ALSO, in recent days, have been in areas affected or in contact with confirmed or probable cases of Coronavirus.
People who have been in close contact with confirmed cases or suspected cases like the above.
People who have entered Argentina in the last 14 days, from affected countries that I mentioned above.
It is important to understand that this preventive isolation is essential to minimize the spread of the virus.

Those who violate the established isolation will have criminal responsibilities.

Furthermore, the Decree makes it mandatory for each person to report symptoms compatible with coronavirus.

And it also guarantees that every day the population will receive accurate information about the situation.

We are acting according to the recommendations made by the World Health Organization, the authorities of the most affected countries and our experts and scientific societies.

We work on the timely detection and monitoring of potential cases and their contacts.

We made an extraordinary allocation of 1700 million pesos to reinforce diagnostic tasks and add resources for hospital equipment.

The Chief of Cabinet is in charge of coordinating with the different ministries and State agencies the implementation of the actions established by the Ministry of Health to face the pandemic locally.

I assigned a mission to each corresponding Ministry.

For now, we will strengthen sanitary controls at all points of entry to Argentina. We will be very strict in monitoring the movements of people on our borders.
Each manager has a role to play.

The State is present and will accompany everyone, especially our over 65s, on whom the virus has the greatest impact.

We ask them to avoid crowded places and contact with people who have been in countries of transmission in the last 14 days or with people who have respiratory symptoms.

I ask each citizen and each citizen to also take the prevention measures that we are and will be disseminating.

The general recommendation is:

-wash your hands regularly with soap,

coughing or sneezing covering the mouth with the crease of the elbow,

-ventilate environments and clean surfaces and frequently used objects.

We have to do it with everyone.

We have to demonstrate once again that on important issues we are united.

We are going through difficulties. We will continue to monitor the evolution of this pandemic instantly to update and take the necessary measures.

We are Argentina. A united country in which each one must commit to the others and all to each one, starting with the State.

A united country in which we understand that what happens to the other affects us all.