Dear Sir or Madam

In order to ensure that the health infrastructure is used optimally in all cantons and to prevent overloading in individual cantons as far as possible, the Federal Council today also decided on restrictions for people who want to enter Switzerland from Italy. The Federal Council is also following a request from the Ticino and Valais authorities.

These measures also pursue the goal of protecting the entire population in our country, specifically ensuring a functioning health system throughout Switzerland in which the capacities for the treatment of our patients are preserved. It is important to prevent people from Italy from being treated in hospitals in Switzerland, especially in the border cantons of Ticino, Valais and Graubünden.

The Federal Council has therefore decided in principle that all persons from risk countries or regions are denied entry into Switzerland.

The entry restriction is targeted and proportionate. It is in line with the Schengen Agreement, Article 25 and following of the Schengen Borders Code, and with the Agreement on the Free Movement of Persons. Both agreements give the member states or associated states, including Switzerland, the necessary leeway to control, control and restrict entry in such a special situation. I have notified the European Commission this morning about the reintroduction of border controls in Switzerland.

The entry from Italy to Switzerland is therefore fundamentally restricted. As in other countries - as there is a lot of writing about the different regimes - Switzerland has exceptions. Exceptions are the following:

The Swiss can of course enter Switzerland. And also people who have a valid residence permit.
People who have a professional reason for entering Switzerland can also continue to enter the country. There will certainly be some cross-border commuters, but this is also about deliveries.
Transit is also possible, i.e. pure transit through Switzerland, if you don't want to stay in Switzerland or want to stay, is possible.
If you want to make one of these exceptions, you have to prove it.

A few words about the effects on the asylum area: Asylum seekers in Switzerland generally pose no particular danger in connection with the coronavirus. I would like to send this in advance. These are groups of people like others. They should therefore be treated in the same way as everyone else. This means that there is no exception for them at today's border measures. There is no absolute need for asylum seekers to enter the country in the sense of the regulation passed today because there is no asylum-related risk in Italy. This means that asylum seekers can easily submit their application in Italy and do not have to cross the border. It would therefore not be justified to exempt asylum seekers from public health entry restrictions. This is in line with the Dublin III Regulation. In addition, transfers of foreigners from Italy to Switzerland are suspended in accordance with the Dublin Regulation. So Italy can no longer transfer Dublin cases to Switzerland.

The additional measures at the borders apply immediately. They are implemented by members of the Federal Customs Administration, i.e. the border guard corps, but also the cantonal police.

The ordinance that the Federal Council has issued for this is limited to six months. If the situation has relaxed, it can of course be overridden beforehand.

The Federal Council is convinced that it is responding appropriately to the special situation with these measures at the border. This enables us to specifically influence the number of border crossings to protect the interests of the Swiss population.