Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. We have taken a very important decision. I would first like to ask everyone to wait for the announcement by the government and our ministers. Because we found out that there are various suggestions on social networks that have changed. The point is that we do not have any things in the media space that have been changed during our government negotiations.

We were discussing the situation here last night almost until late at night, and we are convinced that the decision that the government has taken today, that is, announcing a state of emergency, is the right one. We do everything we can to prevent the spread of coronavirus in the Czech Republic and to protect the health of our citizens. At the moment we have 96 positive findings. Thirteen laboratories are currently analyzing another 143 samples.

The Government of the Czech Republic today, on March 12, 2020, in accordance with Articles 5 and 6 of Constitutional Act No. 110/1998 Coll., On the Security of the Czech Republic, declares for the territory of the Czech Republic Republic Emergency, starting from 2 pm on 12 March 2020, it is right now, for 30 days.
Pursuant to Sections 5a to 5e and 6 of Act No. 240/2000 Coll., On Crisis Management and on Amendments to Certain Acts, the Government orders the Crisis Act, as amended, to deal with the crisis situation, the specific implementation of which is determined by the Government. by a separate government resolution.

We have clearly agreed that this emergency is governed by the government. I would be very pleased if speculation on how to do it and whether to do it would stop. We have clearly imposed on the Government members of the Government to ask the Government for prior consent to the measures relating to the declaration of emergency that a Member of the Government or a Ministry managed by him / her within the scope of his / her powers, before applying

This means that each member of the government, because the members of the government have their powers by law, can make decisions on their own, but at this point we agreed that in an emergency state ministers need to come to the government and discuss it with the government, and the government will approve it. So it happened.

Existing emergency measures issued and valid by the Ministry of Health are not affected by the state of emergency. This decision, as I said, comes into effect on 12 March at 2 pm and expires 30 days after its entry into force.
Mr. Vondráček, the President of the Chamber of Deputies, was present at the Government meeting and I have the task of informing the Chamber of Deputies of the Parliament of the Czech Republic without delay about the declaration of emergency according to paragraph 1 of this resolution.

We then discussed the individual crisis measures for a long time. The most drastic will be the Minister of the Interior. This is mainly because we will prohibit entry for all foreigners coming from risk areas, except for foreigners with temporary stay over 90 days or permanent residence in the Czech Republic. These are the risk areas we have defined thirteen. Apart from China, Korea and Iran, these are countries of the European Union, namely Italy, Spain, Austria, Germany, Switzerland, Sweden, Norway, the Netherlands, Belgium, Great Britain, which is no longer in the European Union, Denmark, France. This means that the measure is a ban on entry not only of those people who live in those countries, but for all travelers coming to the Czech Republic.

At the same time, we banned citizens of the Czech Republic and foreigners with permanent or temporary residence from entering these risk areas.
At the same time, we have taken significant measures in transport. We forbid all carriers in international road passenger transport to provide passenger transport across the borders of the Czech Republic with effect from 14 March 2020 from 0.00 onwards.

In addition, we have taken further action within the health sector, with effect from March 13, 2020, tomorrow, at 6:00 am theater, music, film and other artistic performances, sports, cultural, religious, federal, dance, traditional and similar events and other gatherings, exhibitions, festivals, pilgrimages, shows, tastings, markets and fairs, educational events, both public and private, with participation of more than 30 people at the same time, until further notice of this emergency measure.

This prohibition does not apply to meetings, meetings and similar actions of constitutional bodies, public authorities, courts and other public persons held by law and does not apply to funerals.
With effect from 13 March 2020, from 8 pm, the presence of the public shall be prohibited between 8 pm and 6 am in food service establishments. Furthermore, the operation of catering establishments located within shopping centers with a sales area exceeding 5 000 m2 shall be prohibited with effect from 13 March 2020 from 6 am.

Furthermore, it is prohibited, with effect from 13 March 2020, from 6.00 am, public presence in the premises of certain service providers - gyms, natural and artificial swimming pools, solariums, saunas, wellness services, music and social clubs, entertainment facilities, public libraries and galleries .

Furthermore, the emergency measure of the Ministry of Health of 10 March 2020, ref. 10666/2020. Furthermore, in the framework of education, we have adopted a government resolution that is banned with effect from 13 March 2020, and I will not read it all, basically it is mainly prohibited the personal presence of pupils in basic art education.

And other things, the most essential, will say Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of the Interior.