My fellow citizens,

The world is now facing an unprecedented public health crisis. Our country, to date, has not been hit as hard as others. But let us have no illusions: The hardest ones are still ahead of us.

At this juncture any complacency is unacceptable. That is why we have chosen to take strict precautions in time to limit the spread of the virus. And on this road we will continue.
Most people who get sick will have mild or even no symptoms. However, some of our fellow citizens, especially older people, and those with chronic illnesses may need hospitalization. We must protect them first of all.

Our goal is simple: Any serious outbreaks spread over time so that patients are able to receive the care they deserve and deserve from our hospitals.

We are already doing what is needed to safeguard public health: We add beds to public hospitals' intensive care units and utilize private clinic facilities throughout the country.
No structure is over. Both the public and private sectors are invited to work together for the common good.

Express procedures employ 2,000 nurses and doctors with two-year contracts. The first ones will be in place early next week. And after the crisis, they will remain in the public health system.

As you know, yesterday I decided to close all training units for 14 days. It was a difficult but necessary decision, which nevertheless did not endanger the school and academic year.

The Ministry of Education is ready to implement e-learning procedures, initially in the 3rd grade, and has developed scripts for all levels.
This means, of course, that our children will find themselves with a lot of free time. So here's my go to: Keep reading, good friends and little ones at home and whenever you can outdoors. This is the best advice I can give you. Avoid crowded areas where the disease is more easily transmitted. And attention to grandparents! Better to stay away from them, especially if you have the slightest symptom.
From now on, the General Secretariat for Civil Protection will assume the coordination of the Government, the Self-Government, the Armed Forces and the Security Bodies. While the State will function normally. But it will also try new tools, such as flexible working hours, video conferencing and teleworking. Thus, employees will remain active even if they have to miss for a while.
However, we ensure that critical infrastructures and services do not malfunction even at the moment.

The economy will obviously suffer a blow that was impossible to predict. That is why its consequences should be limited.

The payment of VAT and social security contributions for businesses that have been decisively hit has already been suspended. And as of today, we are introducing special leave for working parents in the public and private sectors with children up to 15 years old. The state will finance part of it. But its burden, we must all share, the state, businesses and employees.
Other support measures for affected sectors will soon be announced. We will double as businesses and professionals, providing liquidity and mitigating the effects of turnover reduction.

You know, finally, that, along with other European countries, I have called for changes to the Stability Pact and budgetary targets in order to finance extraordinary expenditure. I believe that this will happen and that the European Union will do whatever it takes to support its member states quickly.
My dear fellow citizens,

It is true that from the position of Prime Minister I was called upon, within a few weeks, to face a major double crisis. But life is full of surprises. They require determination, flexibility, quick decisions and bold moves.

We have successfully tackled the asymmetric threat of immigration. Because society came together under the self-evident government's choice to protect our borders. And the people who were tasked with this mission proved to be great.
This will also counter the health threat of the coronavirus. After all, the faster the virus travels, the faster the cooperation of the international scientific community will bring the vaccine and the treatment of the disease. However, that moment should find us the most healthy!

The government will do what it needs, where it is needed, where it is needed - and often earlier than necessary. Believe me, however: No mass measure can substitute for individual responsibility. And in our open democratic societies, no central decision is made unless all citizens first share it.
Let us again recall some simple but valuable tips that must be established in our lives, just to protect them.

Let's all do our daily hygiene today: We often and thoroughly wash our hands. We avoid touching our faces. We stay home when we have viral symptoms.

We also do not go indoors. And, we do not respond to handshakes and many contacts. We will not look rude, but responsible.
But above all, we are protecting older people and seriously ill patients who are most threatened. We don't visit them often. And let them limit their activities. It will be for their own good and those around them.

The above is not a question of individual rights. But a social duty and a message of conscious self-restraint that mainly concerns the elderly and vulnerable groups, but also other citizens when they have symptoms.
We do not want to hurt ourselves and those we love.

My fellow citizens,

I conclude with a reference to a topic that is very much in the public debate. Personally, in recent days I have felt a strong need to rely on my faith to draw strength and to stand up to the circumstances. I'm sure many of you felt the same way.
As Prime Minister, however, I have to listen to the specialized scientists. What applies to public gatherings also applies to our churches.

Today, our beliefs are not tested, but our faith in human health. The love for the "neighbor" to which Orthodoxy itself refers.

That is why religious duties must also be adapted to reality. And to be carried out, as far as possible, from home, to limit large congregations. The Church of the Believers, after all, is large.
I look forward to supporting the Church's leadership in the common cause. But my institutional role requires me to be clear on the subject.

I know that faith often begins where science ends. But the faith we need now is that we will be able to overcome the crisis. It is enough for us all to follow the instructions of doctors and specialists.

And always considering that we are not only responsible for ourselves, but for all Greek women and all Greeks next to us.