Good afternoon. The Council of Ministers today was, of course, largely devoted to tackling the corona crisis. Obviously, the measures we announced yesterday are deeply rooted in people's lives and I understand the concerns that it raises, the questions it raises, and at the same time we see that our society reacts and adapts very quickly and that is very special. I want to say something more about that. But we are of course aware that each of these measures has a price: in people's personal lives, of course also in society, and that we must always try to find a good balance between them.
I understand that the decision about the schools we took yesterday has led to concerns, misunderstandings, but also annoyance. First of all, I would like to emphasize that we make all the considerations from the point of view of our public health, which is on number 1. Medical experts advised us on that basis not to close the schools, although people should stay at home. That goes for students, that goes for teachers, that goes for janitors. If they have complaints, nose and / or sore throat and or cough with possibly a fever. It is also nice and important at the same time that the schools can remain open so that children can continue to go to school and parents can indeed continue to work. But of course we are aware of the problems that can arise in schools. If there are gaps, for example due to the absence of teachers, it is of course necessary to consider how to proceed within a school. Nor can we ask for the impossible. If that happens, that a school gets the feeling: now we are asked the impossible, I ask for my part, from the crisis organization, two things: in the first place, of course, the schools will also pay attention to the exam students , but especially also look at how you as a school can help in taking care of children of parents in vital sectors that are currently fighting the crisis. Sectors such as health care, sectors such as the police, the fire brigade, our security people, the security industry, but also the people who are working to ensure that our supermarkets, our drugstores, our food supply continue to run smoothly. Find out how in that situation if the school really does not work how you can still help with the children of parents from these vital sectors. It applies to us, from the crisis organization, that we will of course follow exactly how this is going. We will take a look at these kinds of measures we take every day, the situation as it develops and how we proceed. But this is my question and it is really important.
Then we made a decision today regarding flights from risk areas. That was an advice yesterday from the OMT, which is the club that advises us, to limit the influx of people who possibly carry coronavirus in the Netherlands as much as possible, it was decided to ban all passenger flights from high-risk areas in the shortest possible time. These are flights from the countries of Italy, China, including Hong Kong, South Korea and Iran. Flights from these four countries are no longer allowed to leave for the Netherlands after 6 p.m., that is after 6 p.m. tonight, because within the European Union such a measure can apply for a maximum of 14 days, this decision will initially apply until 27 March, but there is the possibility to extend that. If there is cause, other countries may also appear on this list and countries may also be included in the list. We will keep informing you of this. It only concerns passenger flights, so no cargo flights. And we look at the consequences for Dutch people who are currently present in those countries and who want to return.

We discussed today in the Council of Ministers the economic consequences of the crisis with Corona. This was also discussed yesterday in the parliamentary debate. An initial letter has been sent with a first set of measures this week to the House of Representatives that we are taking and we are now considering further measures and will report on this again next week. I also said that in Parliament yesterday. Money should not be the main subject here. The main topic here should be as it is called: whatever it takes. We must protect our economy from this crisis.
Then I want everyone in the Netherlands who had to deal with these measures yesterday and adapted so quickly, and this morning we saw the pictures of people who had to take the train because they cannot work from home in their sector. Which showed the empty wagons. And then you see what a huge impact this has, but also how quickly people adapt. I am personally there, I think a lot of people, very impressed, how we do that as a country. How we follow advice in such a crisis. I want to have said that here. But I also want to say how important it is that it happens, because it cannot be emphasized often enough. We can only solve this together, with 17 million people. We can only do that if we do it together. And to those people, and I think that's a minority, but still, but there are those who say, well, I'm not too worried. I would like to say to those people: think of other more vulnerable people, who are rightly concerned, because they may be less strong, because they may be less young than yourself.
So I'm telling everyone: stick to the new rules. And I also want to call on everyone to keep an eye on each other. And especially for the people who are having an extra hard time. Help each other where possible. Hoarding is not necessary. At the moment there is enough in our stores and it is also a bit annoying for the people who are currently working hard for us to fight the crisis that they come home tonight, go to the local supermarket and find shelves half empty, so it is actually not very nice for the people who are working hard for us at the moment. So I would say, if someone has a tendency, stop it. It is not necessary. Our drugstores, our supermarkets, there is enough to eat and enough to buy. There are no shortages. And having said that, I would also like to express my appreciation once again to all the people who are currently working every day to ensure that things run smoothly. In all those sectors that are so vital to all of us. Yes, that is the doctors, that is the nurses, that is the pharmacists, that is also the people at the police, at the fire brigade, the teachers, the security guards, the people who fill the boxes in the supermarkets and the chemists and who are in charge there give to those stores. That is all very important. And we realize that a lot is being asked of you and that will continue for a while. But we are all in the Netherlands, and I say that on behalf of everyone, a lot of respect for what you do for all of us.
Then a very brief comment for you too, for our mutual understanding, of course, the Donner Committee was also discussed today. That is the committee that has dealt with that incredibly complicated and painful topic of childcare allowance issues, which has all happened. That committee has published a report on this. We take over that. And we are also coming up with additional measures for affected parents with very distressing problems and for the sake of brevity I would actually like to refer to Alexandra van Huffelen and Tamara van Ark, because they will explain in a moment after this press conference in this room what steps we are going to put there.
