After what I have to say, if you have any questions, I'll be happy to help. The operative tribe held - I must say from now on - its regular meeting because we will have such a meeting every day at noon. We have reviewed the situation and the coronavirus numbers and data look like this. This is last night's information. There are two infected in Hungary, 24 are in quarantine, so they are isolated and 230 samples are being processed, this is the number of samples tested in an accredited laboratory. In the world, there are 3,268 patients who died last night. There are 95,748 people in the world according to our knowledge, today 's knowledge and last night' s knowledge, and there are 53,418 healed, so there are people in the world who have been cured of this infection. The Operational Staff will report every day to Hungary
figures and data on the world situation we have. That is how we are today. This means that at the moment, Hungarian defense is focused on individual cases. We have three categories. There are unique infections, this is now the case in Hungary, when the center is not yet formed. There are group cases where a focal point is formed, and in the worst case it becomes massive. Our goal now is to prevent individual cases from becoming a group case or developing foci that then lead to a group illness. The operative tribe knows its own limitations too, because as in the whole world, so in Hungary, the basic characteristic of the situation is that people have a weakened sense of security and who have been ill enough or have many children and they have been ill, you know that a person's sense of security can only be restored if he or she knows that there is a cure for the disease, and there is a vaccine to cure the disease. And we all know that such a vaccine is not yet available in the world at the moment, and we hope to have it as soon as possible, but it is not yet available. And we know that then there will be relative calm, and people's sense of security will pop up when this vaccine is discovered and made available to everyone.
If I may allow it, I would like to say a few general thoughts about the tribal meeting. The tribe also stated today that there are still two dangers of the coronavirus, one of public health and the other of economic nature. It is a virus that can visibly damage human life and economy at the same time. This tribe, whose members I am about to introduce to you, or I will introduce you to my key people, is a tribe dedicated to the protection of human lives, so it is not about economic issues. This is also the case, first and foremost, we need to deal with human life issues, first, then economic impact, and this will be a later job. Effective defense requires effort from everyone. So I would like to ask everyone, who is watching us, to work on this,Defending should not be seen solely as an official or governmental task, as it requires everyone to make effective defenses. We require accurate work, attention and perseverance from the authorities, and it is quite difficult for the people in the authorities, but it can also take months. Today, the situation is that almost everyone in Hungary trusts doctors and trusts nurses. In general, the authority of public health professionals in Hungary is high, and I very much hope that their work will strengthen this. This situation requires the government to provide the necessary resources for defense work. There will be no mistake in this, and I can promise the professionals and the public that there will be no financial barrier or obstacle to the fight against the virus in Hungary. I want to ask for restraint on the political parties, the protection of the people is not a political and not a party political issue. And most importantly, I want to ask people to cooperate. I ask the citizens of Hungary to be cooperative and understanding if they find that combating the virus involves inconvenience and inconvenience. Now common sense dictates the rules we need to put into effect. Before the virus was introduced in Hungary, we had already taken a number of necessary measures during the prevention phase, and if necessary, we will be making more and more decisions every day as a result of the strain's deliberations. I would like to ask everyone to avoid the two imminent threats. One is to bag the potential problems caused by the virus and the infection, and the other is to panic. So I appeal to you, through the citizens of Hungary, not to bag the situation or to panic.If I allow it, I will introduce you to the closest associates who work in this operational tribe so that you can clearly understand what people are up to. The operative staff is led by Deputy Prime Minister Sándor Pintér - I did not accidentally use this title - so he is not acting as Minister of the Interior, but as Deputy Prime Minister, he is the second man in the government to have all the government resources mobilize for the strain to function. Professor Miklós Kásler, the government's minister for public health, is in charge of public health protection. He will be there for you daily. Here, once we are done, he will be happy to stay here and answer your questions, but he and his staff will be at the disposal of journalists and the Hungarian public every day, after the operational staff meeting. We have Cecília Müller, the National Chief Medical Officer, who heads the National Center for Public Health and manages the epidemiological professional defense. His work is particularly important in that the samples, the samples taken, are analyzed in a laboratory under his control. Here is with us Dr. Miklós Gondos, Director General of the State Health Care Center, whose job it is to ensure that protective equipment is available in sufficient quantities and on time.
Gábor Csató, Director General of the National Ambulance Service, is here with us. Obviously, if we detect such an infection, we have to carry it with the special means of transportation provided by the ambulance service. We have with us Director General István Vályi-Nagy, head of South Pest Central Hospital. This is our most important healthcare institution at the moment. Their job is to treat the patients and to operate the quarantine at this hospital. There is also Dr. János Balogh, Lieutenant General, with us as the National Police Chief, whose job it is to provide the necessary working conditions for health and public health workers through military means. And here is Secretary of State István György, his job is to use the administrative tools in this defense, and if there is a mass infection that we want to prevent by all means, and I really hope it doesn't, but in the event of any such occurrence, territorial protection committees must be formed everywhere, and their leadership and co-ordination belongs to it. I could also say that as long as he is not seen, the first phase of defense is successful.
Dear ladies and gentlemen!

What I would like to say is that we have reviewed the protection measures introduced so far in the neighboring countries and even the wider European context. We dealt with the question of what would happen with the events ahead of us and made the decision to leave it to the event organizers for the time being to decide whether to hold the event or not. Of course, if the situation worsens, then of course we can take decisions prohibiting events in the course of the day's sitting, which was not needed today. There is a big event in front of the country that deserves special attention as it can affect tens of thousands of people, this is the central celebration on March 15th. We see: - monitoring the situation, listening to daily reports, and - deciding what to do by no later than Tuesday. If the situation in Europe worsens, we will cancel the central ceremony on Tuesday, if we do not see it as necessary, then we will make the decision on Tuesday at the latest. If it can be done sooner, it will be sooner, but if there is no extraordinary event, you can expect a decision on it after Tuesday's stint.

Thank you very much for your attention


