After the outbreak of the new coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, when I presided over the meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee on January 7, I put forward requirements for the prevention and control of the new coronavirus pneumonia. On January 20, I specifically issued an instruction on the prevention and control of the epidemic, stating that we must attach great importance to the epidemic, do our best to prevent and control it, and require party committees, governments and relevant departments at all levels to give top priority to the safety and health of the people. Take effective measures to resolutely curb the spread of the epidemic. On January 22, in view of the rapid spread of the epidemic and the severe challenges of prevention and control, I explicitly requested Hubei Province to implement comprehensive and strict control over the outflow of personnel. On the first day of the first month, I once again presided over a meeting of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee to re-examine, re-deploy, and mobilize the epidemic prevention and control, especially patient treatment, and decided to set up a central leadership team for epidemic response.
From the first day of the year to the present, prevention and control of the epidemic situation is my most concerned issue. I keep track of the spread of the epidemic situation and the progress of prevention and control work, and continue to give oral instructions and instructions. The Party Central Committee issued the "Notice on Strengthening the Party's Leadership and Providing Strong Political Guarantee for Winning the Fight Against Epidemic Prevention and Control". The Central Leadership Group for Epidemic Response has met several times to study and deploy epidemic prevention and control work, and the front steering group has also actively carried out its work.The State Council ’s joint prevention and control mechanism has strengthened coordination and scheduling to coordinate and resolve urgent issues encountered in prevention and control work in a timely manner. Relevant departments perform their duties, and the military actively supports local epidemic prevention and control. Leading groups in charge of comrades in charge of the party and government have been established in various regions, and Level I responses to major public health emergencies have been initiated. The various government, military, and army organs and enterprises and institutions took urgent action and fought hard. The selfless dedication and bravery of the medical staff, the broad masses of the people and the city united and fought together. The situation of comprehensive mobilization, comprehensive deployment and comprehensive strengthening of epidemic prevention and control has taken shape across the country. Under the centralized and unified leadership of the Party Central Committee and the joint efforts of all parties, the prevention and control work is being vigorously carried out, and all sectors of society and international public opinion are generally good. When I met with the Director-General of the World Health Organization, Tan Desai, Tan Desai said that the speed and scale of China's action are rare and the world is rare. This is China's institutional advantage. The relevant experience is worth learning from other countries. Measures will effectively control and eventually overcome the epidemic.In general, the Central Committee's judgment of the epidemic situation is accurate, all work deployment is timely, and the measures adopted are also effective. Now, the most critical issue is to work hard, carefully, and to the ground. Let me highlight a few points.
I. On the situation of epidemic prevention and control and key tasks of epidemic prevention and control

Doing a good job in epidemic prevention and control directly affects the safety of people's lives and physical health, and directly affects the stability of the overall economic and social situation, as well as China's opening up. We must do a good job in accordance with the requirements of firm confidence, mutual help, scientific control, and precise policy, race at the same time, and fight against the disease, resolutely curb the spread of the epidemic, and resolutely win the battle against epidemic prevention and control. At present, we must focus on the following tasks in epidemic prevention and control.
First, strengthen unified leadership of epidemic prevention and control. To prevent and control the epidemic, we must adhere to a national chess game. Party committees and governments at all levels must resolutely obey the unified command, coordination, and dispatch of the party's central committee to ensure that orders are prohibited. At present, the implementation of the Party Central Committee's decision-making and deployment in all regions and departments is generally good, but there are also some weak links and issues worth noting. We must make up for shortcomings and plug loopholes. Epidemic prevention and control is not only a medical and health issue, but a comprehensive work, is a general battle, and all work must provide support to win the battle against epidemic prevention and control. The situation of epidemic prevention and control is constantly changing, and various tasks are constantly faced with new situations and new problems. We must follow closely, analyze in a timely manner, act quickly, and do our work firmly and unswervingly.
When adopting prevention and control measures in various regions and departments, it is necessary to consider both the prevention and control needs of the region and its area, as well as the impact on key areas and national prevention and control. Those who fail to implement the decision-making arrangements of the Party Central Committee must dare to criticize and order them to rectify immediately. For those who do not obey unified command and dispatch, serious standardism, and those who dare not to assume responsibility, drift in style, and ridicule others, in addition to investigating the responsibilities of those directly responsible, they must also hold the party and government leaders accountable for serious circumstances. Those who fail to perform their duties shall be punished according to discipline and law.Second, strengthen epidemic prevention and control in key areas. Only by focusing on controlling the epidemic situation in key areas can we fundamentally reverse the spread of the epidemic nationwide as soon as possible. It is necessary to focus on regional coordination of prevention and control forces, resolutely focus rescue and protection resources on the front line of fighting the epidemic, and give priority to meeting the needs of frontline medical staff and treating patients. Hubei Province, especially Wuhan City, is still the top priority of national epidemic prevention and control, and most patients in other places also have contact history in Hubei. Having stabilized the epidemic in Hubei, the overall situation of the country was stabilized. On the one hand, we must continue to comprehensively strengthen prevention and control, strictly implement early detection, early reporting, early quarantine, and early treatment measures across the province, strengthen epidemic surveillance, focus on treating patients, and take home medical observations of all close contacts. On the other hand, we must continue to strengthen measures to prevent the spread of the epidemic. Civil aviation, railways, highways, and water passenger transportation in Hubei have been closed. This has played an important role in controlling the epidemic throughout the country, but the risks caused by the outflow of some personnel cannot be ignored.
The recent outbreaks in Hubei's surrounding provinces and provinces with large population movements have spread rapidly, and newly diagnosed cases have risen rapidly. It is necessary to consolidate the responsibilities of local party committees and governments, strengthen the grid management of community prevention and control, implement carpet-based investigations, and adopt stricter, more targeted, more effective measures to prevent the epidemic from spreading. It is necessary to timely find the risk points and weak links in the prevention and control of returning personnel, implement the prevention and control responsibilities of the inflow and outflow of personnel, and do a good job of passenger health monitoring, disinfection and ventilation of transportation stations. Beijing has a special status. A large number of people who have left Beijing now return to Beijing, increasing the pressure on epidemic prevention and control. It is necessary to improve prevention and control measures, strengthen the control of key groups, reduce the source of walking infection, reduce crowd movement and close contact, and resolutely control the development of the epidemic.
Third, increase the rate of treatment and cure, and reduce the rate of infection and mortality. This is a prominent task of the current prevention and control work. Centralized admission hospitals should be completed and put into use as soon as possible, and medical personnel from across the country will be deployed to assist Wuhan and Hubei as needed, while protecting the physical and mental health of medical personnel. It is necessary to make a coordinated deployment of personnel, try to bring the best soldiers together, bring the critically ill patients together, treat them in a unified way, and strive to reduce the mortality rate. In areas with a high incidence rate, the "Xiaotangshan" model can be adopted to strengthen the treatment work if conditions permit. It is necessary to promptly promote effective methods for treating critically ill patients in various hospitals.
Fourth, increase research efforts. Overcoming the epidemic is inseparable from technological support. It is necessary to scientifically prove the source of the virus, identify the source of infection and the transmission route as soon as possible, closely track the mutation of the virus, and study the prevention and control strategies and measures in a timely manner. I proposed in 2016 that key core technology research can be used to unveil the list. No matter where the hero comes from, anyone who has the ability can unveil the list. The research and development of vaccines and drugs required to combat the epidemic situation must mobilize the enthusiasm of universities, scientific research institutes, and enterprises in all aspects, pay attention to the combination of scientific research and clinical, prevention and control practices, and accelerate the progress on the basis of ensuring scientificity. In addition to relevant data and case information, which are required by law to be kept secret, under the conditions of good national security work, they must be shared and shared with China's scientific and technological community, and experts in clinical medicine, epidemiology, and virology should be organized. Investigate the key characteristics of virus transmission and toxicity, and come up with practical and effective research results as soon as possible. Experts and scholars should be encouraged to take up their spiritual and professional responsibilities, and provide more professional opinions and suggestions on the premise of scientific research.
About Doing a Good Job in Maintaining Social Stability

Doing a good job in maintaining social stability is an important guarantee for effectively responding to major epidemics. At present, the following tasks should be done well.

First, make every effort to maintain normal economic and social order. While doing a good job of preventing and controlling the epidemic, we must keep the production and life stable and orderly, and avoid the panic caused by the increase of confirmed cases and the tight supply of living materials, which will cause secondary “disasters”. We must ensure the production, distribution, and supply of staple foods, as well as the supply of necessities for residents, such as vegetables, meat, eggs, milk, and food. The mayor responsibility system of "vegetable baskets" shall be implemented, the production of non-staple food such as vegetables shall be actively organized, the allocation of materials and market supply shall be strengthened, and measures shall be taken to ensure the smooth passage of vehicles for daily necessities. It is necessary to do a good job in the key supply of coal, electricity, oil and gas, and ensure the energy demand of residents. It is necessary to strengthen psychological intervention and guidance, and do a good job of humanistic care.
Second, maintain medical treatment order. It is necessary to implement special forces, strengthen organizational leadership, strengthen security work at designated medical institutions, isolated places and other key parts, guide relevant units to strictly implement internal security precautions, and fully maintain medical and isolated order. Anyone who assaults and injures medical personnel and disrupts the order of medical treatment shall be dealt with decisively, and the requirements of "three synchronizations" in accordance with law, public opinion guidance, and social control shall be implemented to prevent adverse social impacts. To co-ordinate the medical treatment of patients with other diseases, we must not overlook the other. At the same time, we must pay attention to strengthening the security protection of various law enforcement personnel on the front line to effectively protect their own safety.
Third, do a good job of social security and stability. It is necessary to increase investment in police forces, strengthen the use of explicit police, comprehensively implement the joint security, joint defense, and joint prevention and control mechanism of the public security and armed police, and increase the rate of seeing police and managing affairs. It is necessary to maintain a high-pressure situation, severely crack down on illegal and criminal activities that disrupt social order, such as using the epidemic to drive up prices, hoarding, and looting, and severely crack down on the production and sale of counterfeit drugs, medical equipment, and medical and health materials. It is necessary to pay close attention to and resolve promptly all kinds of emerging problems, and to prevent all kinds of contradictions from overlapping and forming a chain reaction.
Fourth, we must effectively maintain normal traffic order. It is necessary to strengthen road traffic control, actively assist in the inspection and detection of personnel, vehicles, and articles in and out of controlled areas, and give priority to ensuring the passage of ambulances, epidemic prevention vehicles, and transport of medical personnel, medicines, and biological materials. All localities should strengthen overall coordination to ensure the normal passage of personnel and vehicles. Large cities should, according to the actual needs of epidemic prevention and control, study measures such as peak resumption, peak return, shifts to work at different times, suspension of tail number restrictions, and other measures to minimize the pressure on buses and subways and prevent cluster cross-infection.
Third, do a good job of publicity and education and public opinion guidance

The current situation of epidemic prevention and control is grim and complex. Some people have anxiety and fear. Publicity and public opinion work must be strengthened. Coordinate online and offline, domestic and international affairs, and major events. stable.
First, strengthen manifestation and strengthen confidence in defeating the epidemic. Letting the masses know more about what the party and government are doing and what they need to do is crucial to strengthening the confidence of the whole society and defeating the epidemic. It is necessary to in-depth publicize the major decision-making arrangements of the Party Central Committee, fully report the effectiveness of joint prevention and control measures in various regions and departments, vividly describe the touching deeds of the epidemic prevention and anti-epidemic front, widely popularize scientific protection knowledge, and consolidate the powerful forces of fighting against epidemics. It is necessary to increase publicity and education of the law on the prevention and control of infectious diseases, and guide the whole society to act and act in accordance with the law. It is necessary to release authoritative information at multiple levels and high densities, face up to existing problems, respond to the concerns of the masses, enhance timeliness, pertinence, and professionalism, guide the masses to increase confidence, strengthen confidence, and strive to stabilize public sentiment. It is necessary to coordinate and make major propaganda for decisively winning a well-off society in an all-round way, fighting poverty in a decisive battle, and the economic situation, so as to incorporate more warm colors into the current public opinion and create a strong atmosphere of unhindered progress
Second, grasp the lead and strengthen the positive energy on the Internet. It is necessary to strengthen the research and judgment of public opinion, take the initiative to voice, give positive guidance, and strengthen the integration of communication and exchanges, so that positive energy will always fill the cyberspace. It is necessary to carry out targeted spiritual civilization education, strengthen publicity and education on health concepts and infectious disease prevention and control knowledge, and educate and guide the general public to improve the quality of civilization and the ability to protect themselves. We must control the overall public opinion and strive to create a good public opinion environment. It is necessary to strengthen the management and control of online media, promote the implementation of the main responsibility, supervisor responsibility, and supervision responsibility, and crack down on those who take advantage of opportunities to create rumors.
Third, take the initiative and effectively influence international public opinion. The international community is highly concerned about the development of the epidemic, and it is necessary to actively respond to international concerns, tell the story of China's fight against the epidemic, and show the Chinese people's spirit of unity and unity. It is necessary to comprehensively do diplomatic work related to the prevention and control of the epidemic situation, continue to do a good job of communication and coordination with the World Health Organization, relevant countries and regions, promote the sharing of epidemic information and coordination of prevention and control strategies, and win the understanding and support of the international community.
4. On keeping the economy running smoothly

At present, we still have to adhere to the economic and social development goals and tasks of this year. The economic and social development work of the Party Central Committee's decision-making and deployment must be done well, and the various tasks and objectives set by the Party Central Committee must be completed. Areas with a severe epidemic situation must concentrate their efforts on prevention and control of epidemic situations, while other areas must do a good job of prevention and control while coordinating various tasks of reform, development, and stability, especially on issues that involve the victory of building a well-off society in an all-round way and fighting poverty. The key tasks of tackling tough issues must not have the idea of ​​slowing down, waiting for the first.
At present, the epidemic situation has affected the macroeconomic operation, and some service industries have been greatly affected during the Spring Festival. The impact of the epidemic on economic operations will continue, mainly in the areas of intensifying the production and management difficulties of industrial enterprises, especially small and medium-sized enterprises, delaying the construction of investment projects, inhibiting domestic and foreign business and economic activities, and increasing employment pressure. To these real problems and potential impacts, we must know well and actively respond.
First, strengthen your confidence and do not be intimidated by problems and difficulties. I have said many times that China is a large country with strong resilience, great potential, and great room for manoeuvre. We must closely monitor the status of economic operations, focus on the impact and impact of the epidemic on economic operations, and focus on doing a good job of "six stability" and make preparations for dealing with various difficult situations.
First, actively promote the resumption of work and production. Under the premise of good prevention and control work, we must fully support and organize the promotion and resumption of production of various production enterprises to maintain the overall stability of the industrial chain. It is necessary to increase financial support, ensure the reasonable funding needs of enterprises, and prevent the capital chain from breaking. Especially for important material production enterprises and enterprises that have been affected by the epidemic in the short term, special preferential policies should be given in terms of loan interest rates and terms. It is necessary to increase the protection of enterprises for resuming production and employment, organize migrant workers in key industries to return to work in a timely manner, make good use of the policies to help enterprises stabilize their posts, and solve the problem of difficult and expensive employment of related enterprises, and maximize the stability of enterprise employment.
Second, promote the construction of major projects. The key is to choose the right project and ensure that the investment is accurate and effective. It is necessary to seize the golden season of construction after the Spring Festival, increase the start of new investment projects, and actively promote projects under construction. It is necessary to adjust and optimize the investment structure, and prioritize the investment in the central budget to urgently needed projects such as emergency medical treatment facilities and isolation facilities in epidemic-stricken areas. It is necessary to focus on overcoming the last bastion of poverty alleviation, combining with the promotion of rural rejuvenation strategies, and taking epidemic prevention as the starting point to strengthen the improvement of rural human settlements and the construction of public health systems. It is necessary to strengthen the guarantee of land, capital and energy consumption, and ensure that major projects, especially manufacturing projects, are started in time.
Third, focus on stabilizing household consumption. Increasing consumption is one of the important focuses to hedge the impact of the epidemic. We must accelerate the release of emerging consumer potential, actively enrich 5G technology application scenarios, drive 5G mobile phone and other terminal consumption, and promote increased consumption in e-commerce, e-government, online education, and online entertainment. It is necessary to better meet the consumption needs of residents 'healthy life, and take this epidemic response as an opportunity to further cultivate residents' healthy living habits, guide enterprises to increase the supply of related products and services, and expand the production and sales of green food, drugs, hygiene products, and fitness equipment . At the same time, it is necessary to actively stabilize traditional bulk consumption such as automobiles, and encourage regions where automobile purchase is restricted to appropriately increase quotas on automobile license plates to drive consumption of automobiles and related products.
Fourth, improve national governance capacity and level. This epidemic is a big test of China's governance system and capabilities. We must sum up experience and learn lessons. In response to the shortcomings and deficiencies exposed in the response to this epidemic, we must improve the national emergency management system and improve our ability to handle urgent and dangerous tasks. This epidemic has revealed that we still have shortcomings in urban public environment management. We must thoroughly investigate and rectify them to make up for public health shortcomings. We have long recognized that the consumption of wild animals is very risky, but the "game industry" is still huge and poses a major hidden danger to public health and safety. Never be indifferent again! I have given instructions on this issue.
Relevant departments should strengthen the implementation of laws, strengthen market supervision, resolutely ban and severely crack down on illegal wildlife markets and trade, resolutely eliminate the bad habits of overeating wildlife, and control major public health risks from the source. We must strengthen the construction of the rule of law, conscientiously evaluate the revision and improvement of laws and regulations such as the Law on the Prevention and Control of Infectious Diseases, and the Law on the Protection of Wild Animals, and we must step up the promulgation of laws such as the Biosafety Law. This epidemic revealed that the reserves of key health and epidemic prevention materials (such as protective clothing) are seriously inadequate. Similar problems may also exist in other reserves. The shortcomings of the national reserve system must be systematically sorted out, and the categories, scales, and structures of the reserves must be scientifically adjusted to improve the reserves. efficacy. To optimize the layout of production capacity of key materials, we must pay attention to optimizing the regional layout of production capacity in terms of key material guarantees, so that the critical moments can be obtained, adjusted quickly, and used.
Finally, I would like to emphasize that in the epidemic prevention and control work, formalism and bureaucracy have appeared in some places. Some grassroots cadres have reported that the most typical problems of formalism and bureaucracy in fighting the epidemic are no more than submitting various forms. In some local cities and counties, health and health bureaus, emergency bureaus, government offices, county party committees, women's federations, education bureaus, and agricultural and rural bureaus have each made one or more forms, and asked grassroots cadres to fill out and report them quickly. The content of these forms is actually It's almost the same, but there is no document or department to help the township and village to solve the problem of even a mask and a bottle of disinfectant.
Some cadres are floating in style and do not go into the front line of epidemic prevention and control. The basic situation of epidemic prevention and control is unknown. The more soldiers are under the city, the less command can be chaos, and the more unified the scheduling. We must let grassroots cadres devote more energy to the front line of epidemic prevention and control, instead of adding burdens to grassroots cadres and consuming grassroots cadres' efforts to combat epidemics in a formalistic and bureaucratic manner. We must examine and identify cadres in the practice of struggle. Those cadres who do not act or act indiscriminately, those who do not engage in work or in-depth work, and those who cannot and cannot do so must be held accountable in a timely manner, and those who have serious problems must be removed from their posts.