Dear everyone!
We are in the midst of a difficult time for Norway and for the world.
Norway is put on a big test.
Both as a society, but also as individuals.
During this period we will all have a different everyday life.
The drastic measures we are now taking are in the hope of stopping the virus.
The corona virus spreads quickly.
It causes fear and fear in both children and adults.
I understand that fear well.
Now we have a new situation where we have the first cases we cannot trace back to infection abroad.
We know that many more will be infected in the days to come.
We are now in a new phase in the fight against this infectious disease.
The virus infects when people gather and are close to each other.
Therefore, it is now absolutely crucial that all the inhabitants of the country take part in a dawn to curb the infection.
We will do so in solidarity with the elderly, the chronically ill, and others who are particularly at risk of developing serious illness.
We must all protect ourselves, in order to protect others.
We stand together through this period - not with clamps and handshakes - but by keeping our distance.
It requires a lot of each one of us. We must care for each other and help each other as best we can.
We have managed to get through tough times before - I am sure we will do it now.
The scenarios show that more people will die from Korona in Norway.
More people will experience having planned operations postponed due to capacity challenges in the health sector.
Many people's everyday lives are turned on their heads.
Therefore, we are now taking drastic measures in the hope of stopping the virus.
We have already introduced several measures to prevent the spread of infection in line with professional advice.
But these measures are no longer enough.
Today, the government comes with the strongest and most radical measures we have taken in Norway during peacetime.
The measures will have a major impact on our personal freedom.
These are measures that directly affect our everyday lives and how our social life works.

Now this is absolutely necessary.

I had a meeting with the parliamentary leaders yesterday, and I want to thank the parties for good input and feedback.
Political Norway is united in using powerful measures.
The most important thing now is to ensure the life and health of the country's inhabitants.
We do this with a number of new measures:
All the country's kindergartens, schools, high schools, colleges and universities are closed.
Kindergarten children and children in the small school stage with parents who have socially critical functions receive a care offer in their kindergarten and school.
We must keep in mind who we should now cherish. We cannot therefore entrust childcare to grandparents in the risk groups.
The Minister of Health and Care Services will return to the other measures.
This will be a burden for both businesses and families.
And sick days with children will be extended in the regulations, and we will help ensure that in the total package of financial measures we also help companies in the future.
 
Health services in Norway are among the very best in the world.
Now health professionals are preparing around the country for the biggest challenge they have ever faced.
You should know that you have our support and confidence to do your job.
In Norway we stand together when it comes to this.
We are mobilizing for cooperation and cooperation in small and large communities. Now this is more important than ever.
The virus is so contagious that we cannot touch each other.
But we must take care of each other.
In recent days, organizations, companies and municipalities have taken many initiatives to limit infection. They have taken the advice seriously and made responsible choices.
That's very good. And we need to do more of this. Everyone must think through what they can do to limit the infection.
If we work hard now, we can rather release a little later.
We must deal with this crisis without creating major lasting problems in Norwegian business. We will return to the most urgent measures for this tomorrow.
But the business world is also served with the fact that the infection does not spread so that even more people have to stay home even longer.
We must put life and health first anyway.
For each other. And for all those we love.