My countrymen, good evening.
I am now addressing the nation together with the civilian, military and police sectors --- the organizations that would count in our enforcement of the laws to protect the people of the Republic of the Philippines.
Pardon my broken Tagalog. But to my countrymen, you, I say: Do not panic. 
Don't be so stressed that you can't do what you want to do. We still can but we have restrictions, there are conditions because of the crisis.
The crisis is very, very clear, COVID-19 is spreading all throughout the country including the Philippines. What we have here is no cure. We don't have anything to buy at pharmacies to cure COVID-19.
It’s a virus. Our only defense is that our body is in good health without pain. If you are weak, make yourself healthier by whatever means maybe food, vitamins. But most of all, try to obey what government is suggesting or ordering you to do.
Don't be afraid, don't be nervous but there is no any antidotes yet. It would only come in a form of a vaccine. Like biting your dog then there is the --- they call it rabies or rabies, if you have, fight.
[...]  But until now, it's not over yet.
 So, there it is. It's a serious one. It is true. Don't underestimate. Don't minimize it, I said, but don't kill yourself with worry because the government is doing everything possible to make it at least controllable, but if you cooperate.
If you don't cooperate, ah the problem would start and it would start with you and end with you then. So those who say social distancing, just follow it. And those provided by the Department of Health, follow what doctors say because they know it well.
 The military, me, everyone who is not a doctor knows nothing, we can't help you. It's only the medical people and medical experts who can help us. So listen to them.
Here we have, Secretary Duque, and Secretary Duque would articulate what he knew, what new information was coming in and he would tell us what to do. So it's very important to give credence to what he says. What matters is that you obey.
And we have this task force, inter-agency, including the military and police because we need their help just in case. Maybe this would create a public disturbance, disorder, but I think it's just because you know, I know that you want to follow because you want to help everybody including yourself and your family.
We have a resolution now. But maybe I will convert this into an executive order to really follow everything.
It is said that the first resolution is: A province quarantine is advised when there are at least two positive COVID-19 cases belonging to different municipalities, component cities or independent component cities in the same province, this national capital of a province.
 That's the definition of what that is.
These LGUs which have imposed community quarantine in their respective jurisdiction, upon the declaration of State of Calamity, shall be allowed to access their Quick Relief Response. This means that what you have in your province that you have prepared can now be utilized to the fullest with the help of the national government.

Work in the executive department --- that's my department. That's three: department --- 'that's the executive department, me. Then Congress is another department, independent of that. No need to follow that. They have their own if they want. And the other department actually is the judiciary. We are different but I think all the people in government who know what public works, tourism, are in my department. Your public health is here for me so that's what I ordered for study and this is our result.
So work in the executive department shall be suspended during this period.
Unemployed, they are suspended. Well, don't go in. Without prejudice to the formation of skeletal workforces by government agencies in order to maintain the unimpeded delivery of services to the public. That means offices, national, unemployed but skeletal ones - a few employees, volunteer or selected, who will be the first ones --- to man the fort, right. They run the department but with a reduced workforce.
This flexible work arrangement, however, will be encouraged in the private sector. The Department of Labor and Employment and the Department of Trade and Industry shall issue guidelines to safeguard the welfare of workers. All manufacturing, retail, and service establishments are advised to remain in operation during the said period. Provided, that strict social distancing measures are required to be observed by their respective managements.

I mean privately, outside of government, the work is continuous but so is, reduced, the skeletal yet --- pretty much, just the choice. And if there are no diseases, they will work but the factory owner or what kind of business you are, warehouse, see to it that they are taken care of by their management. Don't let your workers down.
  Mass public transports including the Light Rail Transits, the Metro Rail Transit, and the Philippine National Railways will continue in operation. Keep up the good work. Provided, that the Department of Transportation shall issue guidelines to ensure social distancing in said public transports.
That is, your work is continuous but social distancing, 'your distance to the other fellow, is a bit far. Because he was coughing or sneezing, at least the germs that he just couldn't pass because there was the distance.
So it behooves upon the Transportation department to come up with the guidelines, based on what the Health department orders. All in all, the most important, the hardest, Department of Health. Whatever we do, whatever they command, what they command for us, we will obey. I wouldn't, if not Dr. Duque of the DOH.
Land, domestic air, and domestic sea travel to and from Metro Manila shall be suspended beginning 15, 2020 --- March 15, 2020 and to end on April
 14, 2020 at 12 o'clock. Subject to the daily review by the Inter-Agency Task Force.
So no fly, travel is limited. But it's the railways below, that's okay. At the same time, observe again social distancing. But on the plane, beginning March 15, 2020 ... March 13 now? [12] Ah, 12. Yes. March 15, at midnight, from what --- it takes, it falls in effect.
So keep that in mind. But subject again to review day to day. Let's see what happens. Well --- if there is a slowdown in the contagion or that's it, then --- it's just a bit lost on him, that is the history of these diseases. They come and go in every two or three generations. There is really a problem we have been given and nothing we can do.
It's really their job. The Code Alert System for the COVID-19 public health event is hereby raised to Code Red Sublevel Two (2). The Department of Health has to explain to the public this wherewithals of Code Red Sublevel Two. I think which is the highest as prescribed by WHO. It's a bit --- we're here to the maximum and it's really for the protection of humanity.
 The recommendations of the Department of Health Technical Advisory Group on imposing Stringent Social Distancing Measures in the National Capital Region are adopted for a period of thirty (30) days from the issuance of this Resolution, the salient points --- 'which are important --- of which are as follows ... Your priorities set forth in social distancing measures.
 The suspension of classes at all levels in Metro Manila is hereby extended until April 12, 2020. That's almost a month now. So no class. You can just take a vacation home. Avoid ... I'm sure there are things out there that you haven't seen yet.
If I were a student, even if I was a student then, I would avoid the - what bars there, nightclubs, 'the crowds where people congregate and be near you. Cough that one, he passed. 'When you get it, you cough, you go there too.
Try to avoid people, crowds --- that's it, for what --- for your own protection. Don't ... There are people who will say, "Ah, that's fine if you're dead, dead." That's right. But if you're dead, you're really dead, too.
So sorry mom and daddy. So better just stay within the premises of the house. If I were you ... You know, I know what you're doing. You buy a lot of cell phones. You can do nothing if you do not knit there either.
I mean, all --- everywhere that I look. Here is what the person doesn't care about, right there on the cellphone. So we are reduced to a one village, or 'closer than talking, you have your cellphone and that is a benefit which was not given us during our time.
This is number one: The suspension of classes at all levels in Metro Manila is hereby extended until April 12, 2020. Provided, that all students will continue to fulfill their educational requirements during the said period.
What is the meaning? If you do nothing, the government says you should study. But this, I do not expect next - you will. I'm sure, 'your hands are on that cellphone instead of studying. I'm sure of it.
  But for you guys who really want to improve your lot, better make use of the time to study.
But for you guys who really want to improve your lot, you better make use of the time to study because ...
You know kids, you kids, it's --- you - the one who dies without leaving the house eh. Then you make all sorts of excuses. But you know, there will be truant officers. You know that truant? [ ... ]... It's an American practice.
'When you get outside, go in --- you just hang around there, doing nothing, shouting, police and military will approach you. You will be asked, then you have a problem. 'When you say, "we're just out here." And then maybe if you are arrogant, you will be taken to the station for record purposes, that you are disobeying, that you are intransigent and that you are not fulfilling your duty.
You know, even without ... There are a set of rules governing the responsibilities of a Filipino citizen. You may not know that. There it is.
So you have duties to perform also. Avoid trouble with the law, avoid trouble with anybody, just in the meantime, follow. Better just stay home and study. That is my advice. But if you don't want to, you stick with your cellphone, its not your cellphone
you. [...] We can't do anything.
Mass gatherings, defined as a planned or spontaneous event where the number of people attending could strain the planning and response resources of the community hosting the event, shall be prohibited during said period.
'Decide whether you are planning to meet or have a rally. You just plan to be spontaneous. “Let's do something, it's our job. After all we have done nothing, we just have fun. ”
You know we do not --- I do not want anybody interfering in your enjoyment as a citizen of this Republic. I do not want the police and the military to see you. It could be messy. Because those --- the rest of you are stuck. These police and military, they have their orders to enforce.
  So that if you are in this category of a --- group you 're close,' the social distancing is no longer obeyed and --- that is, you are violating the rules. And if you insist, it is one of a --- just giving confrontation to something like disobedience which is punishable under the Revised Penal Code.
If you fight, it becomes --- you might get beat up or whatever and then it becomes an assault on an agent of a person in authority. In which case, from a simple violation of a rule, it will now ripen into a crime that is punishable by law and you can go to prison. That’s the problem. I do not want. I do not want. I do not want the military and police to see you.
But I tell you, if you are advised, just obey. Nothing is lost to you but to you. It's for your own good. It wasn't for us at all. I, I hate it. But you have to do it because there is a crisis that is engulfing the country right now.
Community quarantine is hereby imposed in the [entirety] of Metro
Manila and in other --- in other areas the LGUs are advised to abide by the following guidelines imposing localized community quarantine in their respective jurisdictions.
For Manila, there's ... We don't want to use that but --- because you're afraid to say "lockdown". And a --- but it's a lockdown. There is no struggle of power here. No fight here, no war. It's just a matter of protecting and defending you from COVID-19. That's about it. It has nothing to do with the power of the military or the power of the police, nor or my power and of these guys beside me.
Not that. It's not an issue of --- it's just an issue of protecting public interest and public health. That's all.
A barangay-wide quarantine is advised when [there are] at least two positive COVID-19 cases belonging to different households in the same barangay.
If in one barangay there are two infected, you will have to quarantine your village. So ... This is the two of them saying that --- it behooves on the barangay captain actually. The barangay captain is --- under the Administrative Code --- is a person in authority.
That's why if you confront a barangay captain because he is enforcing the law or fighting, it's your fault if you fight
 to the police or the person in authority. The barangay captain and teachers are also heavy.
Teachers, because of their --- the nature of their work --- are persons in authority because they are made so by the law itself to give them the stature in relation to the work of trying to mold and teach the Filipino students. So the teacher also if you are commissioned, you are next Same as barangay captain.
 
 Now if the barangay captain would ask the teachers to help in the enforcement, you better obey because they are in the exercise of teaching the persons there of the barangay of the dangers is part of their work.
Then you have the... A municipality/city-wide quarantine is advised when at least two positive COVID-19 cases belonging to different barangays in the same municipality.
If you are a municipality in a municipality where two people are infected with COVID-19, you are likely to have COVID-19 infection when you quarantine.
 And you know, before I forget ... Eh we don't --- I don't have enough soldiers and policemen to cover all over every inch of the country. I lack.
I have to use it, the barangay captain. The barangay captain is bound by what is written here whether by way of rules implementing in the meantime or if it becomes a part of an executive order.
You better implement this because if not, then you will also go to prison for dereliction of duty or simply not enforcing a rule imposed by the government. The ... Actually the most what is here is the barangay captains.
It falls upon your shoulders to exactly do what this regulation wants to happen. Don't be mistaken here because the Department of Interior and Local Government is pursuing you, you can be dismissed, or you can be suspended and you will have trouble. And besides, I think the electorate will remember you for being a laggard.
[Where?] You see Senator Go? He's just working hard
really. [laughter] That's the public official. Really. Especially the barangay captains and the kagawads.
 You have been elected there. You sought the position. We don't --- we choose it. Nobody ordered us for us to be where we find ourselves now. And then you'll be lazy.
 That's not the way how to do it. One is you go to ... If there's a case --- a good case against you, you lose the position and you are dismissed. And maybe in the worst-case scenario, you will go to jail.
Better be always be reminded of that duty. You chose that. Don't be lazy because you will get hit. You want that position, you work.
The aforementioned measures shall be subject to close monitoring, and
reassessment after the expiration of seven (7) days from the issuance of this Resolution.
You know, we will review. I have imposed upon the Cabinet members and the entire members of this task force to be present everyday. I know that it is hard for them. It is really an imposition. It's quite maybe a burden but I told them the same thing.
Let's go to the government. You choose to be a part of government and there is a crisis with no solution in sight. There is no solution unless there is a vaccine by the grace of God that our scientists can see or invent.
It could be the Philippines for all you know. But I'm just telling you what you're supposed to do. One is that the LGU outside of the National Capital Region --- outside of Metro Manila --- are advised to exercise sound discretion in suspending classes in their respective localities without prejudice to a determination by the national government to suspend classes if the situation so warrants.
So LGUs, you have a little bit of leeway, just a little elbow room for
 you can move on, to respond to the crisis in the community. But it does not allow you to suspend classes on trivial and for you know stupid reasons. It is only done because you have to protect them from the COVID-19.
That's all. Do not do it just to please everybody or ... After all, I have full faith and confidence in our supervisors, teachers. I'm just saying that please do not do it the way others would want it to happen better without class, nothing like that.
 
 Do not do so because in the following statements: the Philippine National Police and the Armed Forces of the Philippines, in coordination of the Inter-Agency Task Force, shall be called upon to ensure effective and orderly implementation of the above measures.
This is not martial law. It is not a martial law. It's not even something extraordinary. But what is sought --- what is sought to be solved here is the again, nothing but to fight the virus and to exact compliance. You better believe it.
 Now next: A meeting shall be conducted daily by and between the Secretaries and the members of the agencies of the IATF --- that is the Inter- Agency Task Force --- including the Cabinet Secretary, Secretaries of National Defense, Environment and Natural Resources, Trade and Industry, Social Welfare and Development, Education, Agriculture, the chief of staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, Philippine Navy, Philippine Air Force and Coast Guard because in a total breakdown, I would need their help to carry on with the governance. I need them not to fight with you guys. Do not be afraid of your soldiers. That's a soldier.
The Armed Forces --- the Armed Forces is there to serve you. They are your soldiers. So don't be afraid if they are at the command of the civilian authorities. 'The Department of Health ordered us. It's just the secretary.
So but when he says to the military and the police, you have to implement this. Obey them because they have the imprimatur of the civilian authorities. Don't try to play with the martial law, martial law in the military. Not that. Not that.
But in reality, in a total breakdown, public disturbance, you are responsible for us. We don't have ... It's always the military who keeps things in the country in order. That's it. They will see that everything is in order every day of their working days. They see that the Philippines is safe and that all people and offices work.
The Overseas Filipino Workers (OFWs) shall be allowed to travel to mainland China, except to Hubei Province, upon execution of a Declaration signifying their knowledge and understanding of the risks involved. Provided, that a health advisory pamphlet shall be handed out to the OFWs upon departure.
Not really. Not only pamphlets you may not read. You will be gathered in one corner or in one room, one corner, and tell you the --- I don't know if it's Tagalog or Bisaya --- riesgo. The risks that you will be taking when you go back to China.
But China, you know, President Xi Jinping, for all of his goodness to us,
 wrote me a letter and said that he is willing to help. All we have to do is to ask. I, I think, maybe there will be a time if things deteriorate, that I have to call on China to help.
He has said that they have managed the crisis very well in his country and he is very much willing to help if needed. So to the Chinese government, to the people especially to President Xi Jinping, thank you for the consoling words. And maybe --- I hope it would not reach to that point - - but maybe we will need your help. Thank you.
The entry travel restrictions shall be imposed upon those traveling from countries with localized COVID-19 transmissions, except for Filipino citizens including their foreign spouse and children, if any, holders of Permanent Resident Visa. Remember, Resident Vi --- the Filipino no problem --- Holders of Permanent Resident Visa, and holders of Diplomatic Visas issued by the Philippine Government.
'Travelers here want to go unaccompanied especially when their hometown has ordered a travel restriction. Their own people do not allow them to travel after they come here, nor do we receive them. But the Filipino and his family --- because they are
 Filipinos and this is their country, they are very much welcome to come back especially this time if they want a more secure, comfortable place.
Now with regards to these diplomats, ah no need to include them. After all, if you just tell them 'don't go out to your embassy,' you won't go out on your own, just be there.
 Kasi baka kayo pa ang magdala ng sakit ng ulo sa aking bayan. I don’t mind Filipinos giving me a headache. But I certainly do not want anybody other than Filipinos to be giving me headaches.
So that's what --- that's what I can give you advice. You might --- sometimes it's a convoluted thing to listen, over and over.
It's that simple. The purpose: to protect and defend you. From
 what? From COVID-19. Then what is the purpose of government? The purpose of government is to see it that things are in order.
To do that, if things deteriorate, I said, the military and the police will maintain order. That is why it is called peace and order. There has to be a peace and that peace is placed orderly. There must be order in the country. And that is all.
The purpose is to, I said, guard your --- well, just obey. All the cities of the world are before us. We just look at them because they are fast.
In Italy, it's --- 1,000 a day they pass the contagion. Here to us, it is still a little different. But numbers in a crisis can be, you know, cruel. But overnight, you see something --- really fast.
So what we are trying to control is people with COVID and then let's get rid of the healthy ones. They are our target, not for anything, but for
 their own good. They will be asked to maybe go to the hospital and seek treatment.
'The tests of what --- test there for if you have an infection or not, that's free. [Free no?] Free, free of charge. 'It's okay if you're healthy, no need.
But if you are - if - if you are experiencing a cough, this kind of cough after coughing hurts your back, the lungs. Your dad will live there. And of it's too late, antibiotics can't.
It starts with a virus. The virus weakens your body. And it weakens your body, all that enters, then it will kill you. P ***** i ** this virus, nothing worked, anyway. It enters your body, just like AIDS, makes you weak, then it allows other germs to come into your body and you get sick. Usually it's pneumonia. And it's virulent. So seek treatment as soon as possible.
But we are here to serve you and everyday we are meeting and in contact with the rest of the country.
We have a structure. The structure really ... People are asking, "What is your prepa ...? Where is the structure? ” My God, our structure is this Health. There's a regional cross all over. Then there's city health, provincial health. But the national, the regional health centers.
They are already well --- well-equipped, and well --- that's what they have to do. There is the structure.
So let's just obey and I ask you a little patience. It's for your own good. For me. If you don't want me to die, you can't have mercy on me. Because of your stupidity, you don't want to obey.
So let's help each other at this time of our life because everything is placed
in jeopardy. It's really dangerous. It's true, it's a crisis because there's no cure. Okay? Thank you. Thank you for listening. [applause]