Good afternoon to all of you.

We have had a meeting with the government team, evaluating, as we do daily, the behavior of the coronavirus pandemic worldwide and in Colombia.

In this evaluation, we always seek to take measures that have as a first priority the protection of the life and health of Colombians.

It is in this sense that we have to realize - always, everyone - that we are facing a global pandemic, a pandemic that is expanding, and like all pandemics, it has cycles of propagation.

The challenge that we all have as a society is to face, mitigate, contain this situation. And that implies the best of us. That implies working as a team as a society. This implies that the measures we take from the National Government are accompanied and supported by the behavior of citizens.

We are clear that to face the risks of this pandemic we have to find the best protection measures.

That is why we have discussed today measures related to the protection of the family, of society, and of course also of children and young people.

And also prevent young people and children from being factors in the spread of the virus.

For this reason, today with the Minister (of Health) Fernando Ruiz and with the government team, we have made decisions related to the educational system and the university education system, and we have also made decisions related to early childhood care. .

We want to share those decisions. But they have a premise.

Starting tomorrow, children and young people can be in their homes in preventive isolation, with the support of families.

The decisions that are made are not for children and young people to go out quietly to circulate in environments other than the educational environment, but also for them and families to try to isolate themselves preventively in their homes, in such a way that they are not propagating factors. of the coronavirus.

So the invitation I make to you is that these decisions be accompanied by everyone, as a nation, as a country team. Because that will determine that in our country we can avoid and prevent painful negative effects.

We have made these decisions in a timely manner. And we take them based on rigorous analysis.

Yesterday we met with mayors and governors, and we gave a message from everyone to work as a team.

But the other big part of the team are all Colombians, at home and with their behavior.

For this reason, the measures that I am going to ask the government team to detail are aimed at ensuring that tomorrow - starting tomorrow - children and young people go home, preventively isolate themselves, and that they can also maintain their vocation to learning.