Ladies and gentlemen, I greet you tonight. You have certainly followed it: The number of those infected with the coronavirus increased again at the weekend. We discussed the consequences of this corona infection with the Prime Ministers of the federal states on Thursday. As a result, all federal states have closed schools and daycare centers nationwide or will do so shortly.

Today, together with the federal states, we have adopted further guidelines for general behavior. We are guided by what science says to us again and again, namely that the most effective measure to reduce the spread of this infection is to increase the distance, the decrease in social contacts.

Of course, we want to try to preserve the economic processes as much as possible - we already know that there will be no effects. We want to guarantee that medical care can be guaranteed, that energy supply is guaranteed, that the population is guaranteed food and that a large part of the services can also be used.

Nevertheless, we need drastic measures to slow down the infection process, as so often said. These are measures that have never existed in our country before and which are of course drastic. But they are necessary at the moment in order to reduce the number of contacts and thus the number of illnesses and thus also serious illnesses and not to overwhelm our health care system.
It is something extraordinary that we discussed with the federal states today. The measures are also to a large extent and mainly implemented by the federal states. They will do so shortly if they have not already done so, as is sometimes the case. But it was very important to all of us that we have broadly uniform action in Germany.

Because these measures are so special, I would like to present them in detail here.

I start with what is expressly not closed. This is very important to me. The retail trade for groceries, weekly markets, pick-up and delivery services, beverage markets, pharmacies, medical supply stores, drugstores, petrol stations, banks and savings banks, post offices, hairdressers, dry cleaners, laundromats, newspaper sales, construction, garden and pet stores and the Wholesale. Rather, for the areas I have just mentioned, it should even be considered whether we will generally suspend the Sunday sales bans until further notice. Of course, the facilities mentioned are opened subject to hygiene, control of access and avoidance of queues. Service providers and craftspeople can continue to work. All healthcare facilities remain open, taking into account the increased hygienic requirements.

These are the things where it is important that citizens can continue to use them.

Secondly. Bars, clubs, discotheques and similar facilities, theaters, opera and concert halls, museums and similar facilities, trade fairs, exhibitions, cinemas, leisure and animal parks and providers of leisure activities both inside and outside, special markets, arcades are to be closed to the public , Casinos, betting shops and similar facilities, prostitution facilities, brothels and similar facilities, the sporting activities on and in all public and private sports facilities, swimming pools and fun pools, fitness studios and similar facilities, all other retail outlets not mentioned elsewhere in this paper, especially outlet centers and playgrounds.
So these are the things that are closed.

Third. Meetings in clubs and other sports and leisure facilities as well as the taking up of offers in adult education centers, music schools and other public and private educational institutions outside of school, as well as coach trips, additional meetings in churches, mosques, synagogues and the gatherings of other religious communities are prohibited.

Fourth. To be adopted
 

Visitation regulations for hospitals, preventive and rehabilitation facilities, nursing homes and special forms of living within the meaning of the Social Security Code IX as well as similar facilities to limit the visit, for example to visit once a day for an hour, but not for children under 16 years of age and above all not from visitors with respiratory infections,
in the above-mentioned institutions as well as in universities, schools and kindergartens, as long as their operation has not been stopped altogether, a general entry ban for persons who have stayed in risk areas abroad or particularly affected regions in Germany according to the RKI classification in the last 14 days,
Requirements for cafeterias, restaurants, restaurants and hotels to minimize the risk of spreading the corona virus, for example by regulating the distance between tables, regulating the number of visitors, hygiene measures and hygiene instructions,
Regulations that accommodation offers in Germany can only be used for necessary and expressly not for tourist purposes - this also includes and entails that there should be no holiday trips in Germany or abroad -
Regulations that restaurants and dining establishments are generally open from 6 a.m. at the earliest and close at 6 p.m. at the latest.

We made these decisions after intensive coordination and consultation. Of course, they change our everyday life for a certain time, always with the aim of minimizing contacts, slowing things down and avoiding contacts.

We know that our policy can only be effective if we coordinate it well between the federal and state governments, i.e. between all levels of our country, and act with the same determination. I am very grateful that this agreement with the countries could be found in such a constructive atmosphere today.

I have just informed the group leaders of the groups represented in the German Bundestag about the measures.
In addition, there were international activities today, a video conference this morning with the President of the Commission Ursula von der Leyen, the President of the Council Charles Michel, the French President Emmanuel Macron and myself. We also prepared a video conference of the heads of state and government tomorrow, and discussed how the internal border controls can be better coordinated. Germany and France were in agreement, but in many places this was not agreed.

The EU Commission today also issued a travel ban on the entry of citizens from countries that do not belong to the EU, not to the EFTA area and not to Great Britain, even for 30 days, analogous to what we, for example, vis-à-vis the European Union from the United States and other countries have already seen.

We have already had a G7 video conference this afternoon, which was also announced, with the heads of state and government of the G7 countries. The President of the Commission also made this clear: the measures taken by the travel agent, i.e. the entry ban for 30 days, must be implemented by the nation states, the member states of the European Union. We will do that.

But we also talked about G7's activities. We have agreed that we want to work in a coordinated and close exchange and have once again underlined the important role of the World Health Organization. We have made a commitment to the importance of global action, and we have decided that we will continue to be very intensive in this exchange, not only the heads of state and government, but also the ministers of health and finance and economics .
Thank you very much